SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 


SHAKESPEARIAN     GRAMMAR. 


AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ILLUSTRATE  SOME  OF 

THE  DIFFERENCES  BETWEEN  ELIZABETHAN 

AND  MODERN  ENGLISH. 


or  %  $«  of  Spools. 


BY 

E.  A.  ABBOTT,  M.A. 

HEAD    MASTER   OF  THE   CITY   OF   LONDON   SCHOOL, 
FORMERLY    FELLOW  OF  ST.    JOHN'S   COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE. 


REVISED  AND  ENLARGED  EDITION. 


Jfonbon : 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO. 
1870. 


JAN  29  1955 


LONDON  I 

R.    CI.AY,    SONS,    AND   TAYLOR,    PRINTER.1 
BREAD   STREET    HILL. 


CONTENTS. 


PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITION x\i 

Pui  FACE  TO  FIRST  EDITION i 

INTRODUCTION 5 

GRAMMAR. 

PAR. 

ADJECTIVES  used  as  adverbs i 

compounded "...  2 

in  -ful,  -less,  -ble,  and  -ire,  both  actively  and  passively  used  3 

signifying  effect  used  to  signify  cause 4 

singular  used  as  nouns 5 

comparative,  -er,  more 6 

,,  in  -er,  after  -ing,  -ed,  -id,  -ain,  -st,  -ect  .  .  7 

superlative,  -est  used  for  very 8 

,,            in  -est  after  -ent,  -ing,  -ed,  -ect 9 

,,  used  incorrectly  for  the  comparative  ...  10 

comparative  and  superlative,  pleonastically  used  ....  1 1 

All,  both,  each,  every,  other 12 

possessive  transposed 13 

Just ;  mere ;  proper,  very;  influenced  by  their  Latin 

meaning 14-16 

More,  most,  used  for  greater,  greatest 17 

One 18 

Right  used  for  true 19 

SJf 20 

Some 21 

formed  from  nouns,  adverb-;,  &c.,  without  change  .  .  .  22 


vi  CONTENTS. 

PAR. 

ADVERBS  with  and  without  -ly 23 

with  prefix  a- 24 

derived  from  the  possessive  inflection 25 

After ;  again;  all ;  almost 26-29 

Along;  anon;  anything;  away;  back 3°~33 

Besides;  briefly;  by  ;  chance;  even;  ever 34~39 

Far ;  forth  ;  hence;  hither 40-41 

Happily;  here;  hitherto;  home;  how  ;  howsoever   .     .    42-47 

Last;  moreabove ;  moreover 48-50 

Much;  never ;  none;  not 5I~54 

Nothing;  off;  once;  only ;  over  .     . 55~58 

Presently  ;  round ;  severally  ;  since 5  9-62 

.50  inserted  ;  omitted;  =  "also;"  —  "then"  .     .     .    63-66 

So  for  "such  a" 67 

Something;  sometimes;  still;  than  ;  then 68-71 

To-fore ;  too  ;  what,  when  ;  whilst ;  why ;  vet    .     .     .     72-76 

used  as  nouns  and  adjectives 77 

after  the  verb  is 78 

ARTICLE.     An  connected  with  one 79 

An  and  one,  pronunciation  of 80 

A  used  for  "one,"  "any" 81 

A  and  the  omitted  in  archaic  poetry 82 

„  ,,       after  "as,"  "like,"  "than"  .     ...     83 

A  omitted  before  nouns  signifying  a  class  or  a  multitude     .     84 

A  inserted  after  adjectives  used  as  adverbs 85 

A  omitted  after  "what,"  "such,"  &c 86 

A  inserted  before  numeral  adjectives  and  many   ....     87 

An-other 88 

The  omitted  before  nouns  defined  by  other  nouns     ...     89 

,,         after  prepositions c,o 

The  inserted  in  "at  the  first, "  &c 91 

The  used  to  denote  notoriety,  &c 92 

The  before  verbals 93 


CONTENTS.  vii 

PAR. 

The  with  comparatives 94 

CONJUNCTIONS.     And  emphatic  with  participles 95 

And  emphatic  in  other  cases 96 

,,             in  answers 97 

,,             after  exclamations 98 

,,             in  questions 99 

And  used  for  "  also  "  by  Wickliffe 100 

And  or  an  apparently  used  for  if 101 

,,          with  the  subjunctive 102 

And  if 103 

Ant -were 104 

A  nd  if  used  for  "even  if  "  and  "  if  indeed  " 105 

As  contracted  for  "  ail-so  " 106 

A s  apparently  for  "as  if" •   .     .     .  107 

As  that  for  as 108 

As  used  for  "  that "  after  "  so  " 109 

As  parenthetical  =  "for  so" no 

,,  "as  regards  which,"  &c.       .     .     .     .ill 

A  s  for  "  which " ,     .     ,  112 

As,  meaning  "namely" 113 

As  with  definitions  of  time 114 

As  with  "  seem,"  participles,  &c 115 

As  a  conjunctional  suffix 1 16 

Because 117 

Bttty  meaning  and  derivation  of 118 

But  in  Early  English 119 

But  with  the  subjunctive  and  indicative 120 

But,  transition  of  meaning .     .  121 

But  meaning  prevention 122 

But  taking  the  place  of  the  subject 123 

But  with  contingency  expressed  or  implied 124 

But  sometimes  ambiguous >..,     ,     .     .125 

But  after  an  execration  expressed  or  implied 126 


via  CONTENTS. 

PAR. 

But  for  "than"  after  negative  comparatives 127 

But  passes  from  "  except  "  to  "only  "  when  the  negative 

is  omitted 128 

But  varies  in  its  position 129 

But  only  ;  merely  but,  &c 1 30 

Or;  or  ever 131 

Since  for  "when,"  "ago" 132 

So  ="  provided  that  ;"  so  with  the  optative      ....    133 

Where  for  "  whereas  " 134 

Whereas  for  "where" 135 

Whether:  " at  whether" 136 

While I37 

PREPOSITIONS.     Local  and  metaphorical  meaning     .     .     .     .138 
more  restricted  in  meaning  now  than  in  Elizabethan  authors  139 

A- ;  after;  against 140-142 

At  used  for  a-;  rejects  a  following  adjective   .     .     .      143,  144 

By,  original  and  derived  meanings 145 

By  =*  "as  a  consequence  of" 146 

For,  original  meaning  of 147 

For  =  "instead  of,"  "as  being" 148 

For="  as  regards  ;"  "because  of,"  referring  to  the  past  149,  150 

For,  transition  into  a  conjunction 151 

For  to,  origin  of - I  e  3 

For,  variable  use  of 153 

For  =  "to  prevent" 154 

drafter  "am" 155 

Forth  a  preposition jc6 

From  out ^7 

From  without  a  verb  of  motion 158 

In  with  verbs  of  motion      ............    159 

7«for"on" !6o 

,,     "during" j6i 

,,     "  in  the  case  of, ""  about  "    ...  .   162 


CONTENTS.  ix 

PAR. 

/;/  where  we  use  "  at  " 163 

/;/  with  the  verbal 164 

O/,  original  meaning 165 

Of  with  verbs  of  ablation 166 

Of  applied  to  past  time  =  "from" 167 

Of  =  " as  a  cpnsequence  of"  where  we  use  " by,"  " on," 

"  at,"  &c 168 

Of  in  adjurations,  &c 169 

Of  preceding  the  agent 170 

Of  with  verbs  of  construction,  &c.  ;  sometimes  means 

"instead  of" 171 

Of  for  "in;"  appositional  genitive 172 

Of  =  "as  regards" 173 

Of—  "concerning;"  "about" 174 

Of  used  locally  for  "  on  " 175 

Of  used  temporally  for  "during  " 176 

Of  after  partitive,  French-derived,  and  formerly  impersonal 

verbs 177 

Of  after  verbals 178 

Of  redundant 179 

On  metaphorically  used 180 

On  for  "of  "  in  the  sense  of  "about,"  &c 181 

,,  possessively 182 

Out  a  preposition 183 

7>7/for"to" 184 

To,  radical  meaning  "motion  to  ;"  hence  "in  addition  to"  185 

To  "  with  a  view  to  " 186 

To  "motion  to  the  side  of,"  "against,"  "towards,"  "in 

comparison  with,"  "  up  to" 187 

To  with  verbs  of  rest  =  "near" 188 

,,  adjectives  of  obedience,  &c i88</ 

To  =  "equivalent  A?,"  "for" 189 

To;  "  I  would  to  God  ;  "  "/c>-night  " 190 


x  CONTENTS. 

PAR. 

Upon  used  metaphorically ;  adverbially      .     .     .     .     191,  192 
With  for  "by  ;"  for  other  prepositions      ....      193,194 

"  like  ;"  withal I95>  :9^ 

Without  for  "outside  of" 197 

Preposition   omitted  after    verbs  of  motion ;  worth ;  and 

hearing  ....     198,  1980,  199 
„  ,,          after  other  verbs ;    before    indirect 

object 200,  201 

>}          in  adverbial  phrases 202 

Prepositions  transposed 203 

Upon.     "  It  stands  me  upon  " 204 

PRONOUNS,  PERSONAL.     A nomalies,  explanation  of .     .     .     .205 

He  for  him 206,  207 

Him  tor  he;  /for  me 208,209 

Me  for  /;  she  for  her 210,211 

Thee  for  thou  ;  after  "  to  be  " 212,213 

Them  for  they  ;  us  for  we 214,  215 

anomalies  of,  between  a  conjunction  and  an  infinitive,  or 
where  the  pronouns  are  separated  from  the  words  on 

which  they  depend 216 

His  tor's 217 

His,  her,  your,  &c.,  antecedents  of  relatives 218 

Our,  your,  &c.,  used  for  "of  us,"  "  of  you  " 219 

Me,  thee,  him,  &c.,  used  as  datives 220 

Your,  colloquial  use  of 221 

Our  used  with  vocatives 222 

Him,  her,  &c.,  for  "himself,"  "herself"  .     .     .     .     .     .223 

He  and  she  for  "  man  "  and  "woman" 224 

Pronoun  for  pronominal  adjective 225 

//  quasi-redundant  with  verbs 226 

//  emphatic  as  antecedent 227 

Its  post-Shakespearian 228 

Her  for  its  in  Shakespeare  and  Milton 229 


CONTENTS.  xi 

PAR. 

"  Me  rather  had  ;  "  "  /  were  better  ; "  "  /  am  sorrow  "  .  230 
Thou  between  intimate  friends,  but  not  from  son  to  father .  231 
Thou  from  master  to  servant,  you  a  mark  of  anger  .  .  .  232 
Thou  an  insult,  except  to  friends  and  inferiors  ....  233 
Thou  in  direct  appeals,  you  in  dependent  clauses  .  .  .  234 

Thou,  apparent  exceptions 235 

Ye  and  you;  difference  between 236 

My,  mine  ;  thy,  thine  ;  difference  between 237 

Mine,  hers,  used  for  my,  her 238 

Yours;  "  this  of  yours  " 239 

transposed 240 

Thou  omitted 241 

Pronoun  redundant  after  a  conjunctional  clause   ....  242 

,,  in  other  cases 243 

PRONOUNS,  RELATIVE  AND  INTERROGATIVE. 

Relative  omitted 244 

,,  ,,       "  They  in  France  " 245 

,,  ,,       and  attracted 246 

Relative  with  plural  antecedent  often  takes  singular  verb  ; 
and  with  antecedent  in  the  second  person,  takes  verb 

in  the  third 247 

Relative  with  supplementary  pronoun  ;  origin  of  ....   248 

Supplementary  pronoun  ;  when  used 249 

Which  that 250 

Who  ;  transition  from  interrogative  to  relative  meaning     .   251 

What ;  semi-transition,  how  checked 252 

What  for  "  why  ;  "  "whatever;"   "who;"  "any"  253-255 

What  for  "  of  what  a  nature  ?" 256 

Who,  "  as  who  should  say  " 257 

Who,  that,  and  which,  difference  between 258 

,,  ,,  Shakespearian  use  of 259 

That  refers  to  an  essential  characteristic 260 

That  after  nouns  used  vocatively 261 


xii  CONTENTS. 

PAR. 

That,  when  separated  from  antecedent 262 

Who,  for  "and  he,"  "for  he,"  &c 263 

Who  personifies  irrational  antecedents 264 

Which  interchanged  with  who  and  that 265 

Which  less  definite  than  who 266 

The — that;  that — which .267 

Which  more  definite  than  that 268 

Which  with  repeated  antecedent 269 

The -which 270 

Which  parenthetically  for  "  which  thing  " 271 

Which  for  "as  to  which" 272 

Which,  anomalies  of 273 

Who  for  whom 274 

RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.     "So — as:"  "as—as"  .     275,  276 
"  That— that ;"  " that .  .  .  (as)  to;"  "  such— which"  277,  278 

"Such — that;"  "such — where" 279 

"That— as;"  "so.  .  .  (as)  " 280,281 

"So—  (that);"  "(so)— that" 282,283 

That  for  "because,"  "when,"  &c 284 

That  omitted,  then  inserted 285 

That,  "  whatsoever  that  " 286 

That,  a  conjunctional  affix 287 

That  in  287,  origin  of 288 

As,  a  conjunctional  affix 289 

VERBS,  FORMS  OF  : — 

TRANSITIVE,  mostly  formed  from  adjectives  and  nouns     .  290 

,,  formed  from  intransitive  verbs 291 

Advantages  of  this  licence 292 

Transitive  verbs  rarely  used  intransitively 293 

PASSIVE,  formation  of 294 

Passive,  use  of,  with  verbs  of  motion,  £c 295 

Reflexive 296 

Impersonal 297 


CONTENTS.  xiii 

PAK. 

VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  Be,  subjunctive  and  quasi-subjunctive  .  298 

Be  in  questions  and  dependent  sentences 299 

Be  in  the  plural  and  for  euphony 300 

Were,  subjunctive  use  of 301 

Were  after  "while"  and  "until" 302 

Do,  did,  original  use  of 303 

Do,  did,  Shakespearian  use  of 304 

Do  omitted  before  not 305 

,,  and  inserted 306 

May,  can  ;  original  and  subsequent  meaning 307 

May,  antiquity  of 308 

May  in  doubtful  statements 309 

May  with  a  negative  .  . ' 310 

May  for  the  subjunctive  in  the  sense  of  purpose  .  .  .  .311 

Might  =  "could" 312 

May,  might,  used  optatively 313 

Must  =  "is  to;"  original  use  of 314 

Shall,  original  meaning 315 

Will  assumed  the  meaning  of  futurity  with  the  second  and 

third  persons 316 

Shall  assumed  the  meaning  of  compulsion  with  the  second 

and  third  persons 317 

Shall,  "I  shall"  from  inferiors 318 

Will,  "  I  w/7/"  not  used  by  Shakespeare  for  "I  shall  "  .  319 
Will,  with  second  person  ironical  or  imperative  .  .  .  320 

Will  with  third  person,  difficult  passages 321 

Should  denotes  contingent  futurity 322 

Should  =" ought ;"" was  to  " 323,324 

Should  in  questions  and  dependent  sentences 325 

Should  after  a  past  tense  where  shall  would  follow  a 

present 326 

Should,,  tl  should  have,"  Shakespearian  use  of  .  .  .  .327 
Should  denoting  the  statement  of  another  than  the  speaker  328 


xiv  CONTENTS. 

PAR. 

Would  for  "will,"  "wish,"  "require" 329 

Would  =  "was  wont  to" 330 

Would  not  used  for  "should"      .   ^ 331 

VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF  : — 

Indicative,  third  person  plural  in  -en 332 

Third  person  plural  present  in  -es 333 

„       in  ~th 334 

Inflection  in  -s preceding  a  plural  subject 335 

„  with  two  singular  nouns  as  subject     .     .     .   336 

Apparent  cases  of  the  inflection  in  -s 337 

-s  final  misprinted 338 

Past  indicative  forms  in  -u 339 

Second  person  singular  in  -ts 340 

Past  indicative  -t  for  -ted 341 

Participles.     -Ed  omitted  after  d  and  t,  &c 342 

,,  -en  dropped 343 

,,  Irregular  formations 344 

Participial  prefix  y- 345 

VERBS,  MOODS  OF  : — 

INDICATIVE  :  simple  present  for  complete  present  with  ad- 
verbs meaning  "  as  yet,"  &c.       .     .     .   346 
,,  simple    past    for    complete    present    with 

"since,"  &c 347 

,,  future  for  subjunctive  and  infinitive    .     .     .  348 

INFINITIVE  :  to  omitted,  inserted 349 

,,  to  omitted  and  inserted  after  the  same  verb  .   350 

„  "It  were  best  (to)  :"   "Iwerebest  (to)"  351,  352 

,,  to  omitted  after  conjunctions 353 

Noun  and  infinitive  used  as  subject  or  object  .     .     .     .     .  354 

Infinitive  used  as  a  noun 355 

,,  ,,      indefinitely 356 

,,  ,,      at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence 357 

For  to 358 


CONTENTS.  xv 

PAR. 

Infinitive  active  where  we  use  passive 359 

,,         complete  present  after  verbs  of  intending,  &c.      .  360 

SUBJUNCTIVE  :  simple  form 361 

,,  auxiliary  forms 362 

,,  replaced  by  indicative  after  "if,"  &c.,  where 

no  doubt  is  expressed 363 

,,  used  optatively  or  imperatively 364 

,,  optative  use,  advantage  of 365 

,,  complete  past 366 

,,  used  indefinitely  after  relative 367 

„  in  a  subordinate  sentence 368 

,,  after  verbs  of  command 369 

,,  irregular  sequence  of  tenses 370 

Conditional  sentences,  irregularities .371 

PARTICIPLES  AND  VERBALS  : 

Participles  active,  confusion  in 372 

Participial  verbal .   373 

Participles  passive,  confusion  in 374 

,,  ,,         -ed  for  -able 375 

Participles  with  nominative  absolute 376 

,,  expressing  a  condition 377 

,,  without  noun  or  pronoun 378 

,,  pronoun  implied  from  pronominal  adjective      .  379 

,,  adjective  instead  of  participle 380 

Participle  implied 381 

ELLIPSES.     Where  the  ellipsis  can  be  easily  supplied  from  the 

context 382 

in  conjunctional  sentences  :  after  and 383 

after  as,  but,  ere,  if 384-387 

after  like,  or,  since,  than,  though 388-391 

after  till,  too 392-393 

in  relative  sentences 394 

in  antithetical  sentences 395 


xvi  CONTENTS. 

PAH. 

Ellipses  of  neither  before  nor 396 

of  adverbial  and  possessive  inflection  in  conjunctional 

sentences 397 

of  superlative  inflection  in  conjunctional  sentences  .     .  398 

of  nominative 399 

„             with  "has,"  "is,"  "was" 400 

,,             in  the  first  or  second  person      ....  401 

,,             explained 402 

of  it  is,  there  is,  is 403 

of  it,  there 4°4 

after  will,  is,  &c 4°5 

IRREGULARITIES.     Double  negative 406 

Double  preposition 4°7 

Neither,  nor,  used  like  both,  and 408 

Confusion  of  two  constructions  with  superlative   ....  409 

,,             ,,                ,,          with  -whom 410 

Other  confusions  of  two  constructions 411 

Confusion  of  proximity 412 

Nominative  implied  from  participial  phrases 413 

Redundant  object 414 

Construction  changed  by  change  of  thought 415 

,,                   ,,         for  clearness 4^ 

Noun  absolute 417 

Foreign  idioms 4J8 

,,       adjectives 4J9 

Transpositions  of  adjectival  phrases 4I9</ 

,,               ofadverbs 420 

Adverbs  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence 421 

Transposition  of  article 422 

,,             in  noun  clauses 423 

,,             of  prepositions 4-4 

,,             after  an  emphatic  word  or  expression  .     .     .  425 

after  relative 42^ 


CONTENTS.  xvii 

PAR. 

Other  transpositions 427 

COMPOUND  WORDS.     Hybrids 428 

Adverbial  compounds 429 

Noun  compounds 430 

Preposition  compounds 431 

Verb  compounds 432 

Participial  nouns 433 

Phrase  compounds 434 

Anomalous  compounds 435 

PREFIXES.     A- ;  ail-to- ;  at-;  be-;  dis- 436-439 

En- ;  for- ;  in-  and  un- 440-442 

SUFFIXES.     ~cr  ;  ~en  ;  -ive ;  ~ble ;  -less 443-446 

-ly  ;  -ment ;  -ness;  -y 447-450 

General  licence  of 451 


PROSODY. 

The  ordinary  verse 452 

The  "pause-accent" 453 

Emphatic  accents 453# 

The  "pause-extra-syllable" 454 

,,  ,,  rarely   a   monosyllable    except   in 

Henry  VIII. 455 

Unaccented  monosyllables 456 

Accented  monosyllables 45  > 

,,         monosyllabic  prepositions 45 7  a 

Two  "pause-extra-syllables" 458 

WRITTEN  CONTRACTIONS  : — 

Elizabethan  spelling,  contractions  in 459 

Prefixes  dropped 4^0 

Other  written  contractions 461 

CONTRACTIONS  in  pronunciation  not  expressed  in  writing     .     .  462 

R  softens  or  destroys  a  following  vowel 463 

6 


xviii  CONTENTS. 

PAR. 

R  softens  or  destroys  a  preceding  vowel 464 

Er,  el,  le  final  dropped 465 

Th  and  v  dropped  between  two  vowels 466 

/unaccented  in  a  polysyllable  dropped 467 

Any  vowel  unaccented  in  a  polysyllable  may  be  dropped    .   468 

Polysyllabic  names  with  but  one  accent 469 

Power,  prowess,  being,  knowing,  monosyllables     ....  470 

-es  or  -s  dropped  after  s,  se,  ce,  ge 471 

•ed  dropped  after  d  and  / 472 

-est  dropped  in  superlatives  after  dentals  and  liquids      .     .   473 
VARIABLE  SYLLABLES.     Ed  final,    mute  and   sonant  in  the 

same  line 474 

Words  prolonged  by  emphasis 475 

,,       shortened  by  want  of  emphasis 476 

LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.     R  and  /  after  a  consonant  intro- 
duce an  additional  syllable,  e.g.  "  Eng(e)land  "      .     -477 
R  preceded  by  a  vowel  lengthens  pronunciation  ....  478 

/  and  e  pronounced  before  vowels 479 

Monosyllabic  feet  in  Chaucer 479  a 

,,  ,,       ending  in  r  or  re 480 

Monosyllables,  when  prolonged 481 

,,         ,,       exclamations 482 

,,         „       prolonged  by  emphasis  or  antithesis  .     .     .  483 

,,         ,,       diphthongs  and  long  vowels 484 

.,         ,,       containing  a  vowel  followed  by  r      .     .     .   485 
,.         ,,       other  instances  of  prolongation     ....   486 

E  final  pronounced 487 

E  of  French  origin,  pronounced 488 

E  final  in  French  names  pronounced 489 

Words  in  which  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than  with  us  .   490 

Istd  final  in  polysyllables 49 1 

Words  in  which  the  accent  is  nearer  the  beginning  than 

with  us 492 


CONTEXTS.  xix 

PAR. 

Alexandrines,  very  rare 493 

Apparent  Alexandrines,  two  final  extra  syllables  ....  494 
, ,  , ,          two  syllables  in  the  middle  of  a  verse  495 

,,  ,,  explained  by  contractions      .     .     .  496 

,,  ,,  unemphatic  syllables  dropped    .     .  497 

,,  ,,  doubtful 498 

,,  ,,  the  detached  foot 499 

Trimeter  couplet  in  dialogue 500 

,,  .,        in  other  cases 501 

,,  ,,        the  comic 502 

,,  ,,        apparent 503 

Verses  with  four  accents  assigned  to  witches,  fairies,  &c.      .     .   504 

,,  ,,          otherwise  rare 505 

,,  ,,          where  there  is  a  break  in  the  line  .     .   506 

,,  ,,          change  of  thought 507 

,,          change  of  construction 508 

,,  ,,          a  number  of  clauses 509 

,,  ,,          apparent 510 

Short  lines,  why  introduced 511 

Interjectional  lines 512 

The  amphibious  section 513 

A  verse  continued,  spite  of  interruptions 514 

Rhyme,  when  used     ' 515 

Prose,  when  used SlSa 

PAGE 
SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR 430 

NOTES  AND  QUESTIONS 440 

INDEX  TO  THE  QUOTATIONS 453 

YKRUAI.  INDEX 501 

i 


PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITION. 

THE  success  which  has  attended  the  First  and  Second 
Editions  of  the  "SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR,"  and  the 
demand  for  a  Third  Edition  within  a  year  of  the  publica- 
tion of  the  First,  has  encouraged  the  Author  to  endeavour  to 
make  the  work  somewhat  more  useful,  and  to  render  it,  as 
far  as  possible,  a  complete  book  of  reference  for  all  difficulties 
of  Shakespearian  syntax  or  prosody.  For  this  purpose  the 
whole  of  Shakespeare  has  been  re-read,  and  an  attempt  has 
been  made  to  include  within  this  Edition  the  explanation  of 
every  idiomatic  difficulty  (where  the  text  is  not  confessedly 
corrupt)  that  comes  within  the-  province  of  a  grammar  as 
distinct  from  a  glossary. 

The  great  object  being  to  make  a  useful  book  of  reference 
for  students,  and  especially  for  classes  in  schools,  several 
Plays  have  been  indexed  so  fully  that  with  the  aid  of  a 
glossary  and  historical  notes  the  references  will  serve  for  a 
complete  commentary.  These  Plays  are,  As  You  Like  It, 
Coriolanus,  Hamlet,  Henry  V.,  Julius  Ca'sar,  Lear,  Macbeth, 
Merchant  of  Venice,  Midsummer  Night 's  Dream,  Richard II., 
Richard  III.,  Tempest,  Twelfth  Night.  It  is  hoped  that 
these  copious  indexes  will  meet  a  want,  by  giving  some 
definite  work  to  be  prepared  by  the  class,  whether  as  a 
holiday  task  or  in  the  work  of  the  term.  The  want  of  some 
such  distinct  work,  to  give  thoroughness  and  definiteness 


xxii  PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITION. 

to  an  English  lesson,  has  been  felt  by  many  teachers  of 
experience.  A  complete  table  of  the  contents  of  each 
paragraph  has  been  prefixed,  together  with  a  Verbal  Index 
at  the  end.  The  indexes  may  be  of-'iuse  to  students  of  a 
more  advanced  stage,  and  perhaps  may  occasionally  be 
found  useful  to  the  general  reader  of  Shakespeare. 

A  second  perusal  of  Shakespeare,  with  a  special  reference  to 
idiom  and  prosody,  has  brought  to  light  several  laws  which 
regulate  many  apparent  irregularities.  The  interesting 
distinction  between  thou  and  you  (Pars.  231 — 235),  for  ex- 
ample, has  not  hitherto  attracted  the  attention  of  readers, 
or,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  of  commentators  on  Shakespeare. 
The  use  of  the  relative  with  plural  antecedent  and  singular 
verb  (Par.  246) ;  the  prevalence  of  the  third  person  plural  in 
-s  (Par.  333),  which  does  not  appear  in  modern  editions  of 
Shakespeare  ;  the  "confusion  of  proximity"  (Par.  412)  ;  the 
distinction  between  an  adjective  before  and  after  a  noun  ; 
these  and  many  other  points  which  were  at  first  either  briefly 
or  not  at  all  discussed,  have  increased  the  present  to  more 
than  thrice  the  size  of  the  original  book.  I  propose  now  to 
stereotype  this  edition,  so  that  no  further  changes  need  be 
anticipated. 

It  may  be  thought  that  the  amplification  of  the  Prosody  is 
unnecessary,  at  all  events,  for  the  purpose  of  a  school-book. 
My  own  experience,  however,  leads  me  to  think  that  the 
Prosody  of  Shakespeare  has  peculiar  interest  for  boys,  and 
that  some  training  in  it  is  absolutely  necessary  if  they  are 
to  read  Shakespeare  critically.  The  additions  which  have 
been  made  to  this  part  of  the  book  have  sprung  naturally 
out  of  the  lessons  in  English  which  I  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  giving  ;  and  as  they  are  the  results  of  practical  ex- 
perience, I  am  confident  they  will  be  found  useful  for  school 


PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITIOX.  xxiii 

purposes.*  A  conjectural  character,  more  apparent  however 
th  in  real,  has  perhaps  been  given  to  this  part  of  the  book 
from  the  necessity  that  I  felt  of  setting  down  every  difficult 
verse  of  Shakespeare  where  the  text  was  not  acknowledged 
as  corrupt,  or  where  the  difficulty  was  more  than  slight.  Prac- 
tically, I  think,  it  will  be  found  that  the  rules  of  the  Prosody 
will  be  found  to  solve  most  of  the  difficulties  that  will 
present  themselves  to  boys — at  least,  in  the  thirteen  Plays 
above  mentioned. 

Besides  obligations  mentioned  in  the  First  Edition,  I  must 
acknowledge  the  great  assjstance  I  have  received  from 
MATZNER'S  Englische  Granunatik  (3  vols.,  Berlin,  1865), 
whose  enormous  collection  of  examples  deserves  notice. 
I  am  indebted  to  the  same  author  for  some  points  illustrating 
the  connection  between  Early  and  Elizabethan  English. 
Here,  however,  I  have  received  ample  assistance  from 
Mr.  F.  J.  Furnivall,  Mr.  R.  Morris,  and  others,  whose  kind- 
ness I  am  glad  to  have  an  opportunity  of  mentioning.  In  par- 
ticular, I  must  here  acknowledge  my  very  great  obligation  to 
the  Rev.  W.  W.  Skeat,  late  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cam- 
bridge, whose  excellent  edition  of  William  of  Palerne  (Early 
English  Text  Society,  1867),  and  whose  Mceso-Gothic  Dic- 
tionary (Asher,  London,  1866),  have  been  of  great  service  to 
me.  Mr.  Skeat  also  revised  the  whole  of  the  proof-sheets,  and 
many  of  his  suggestions  are  incorporated  in  the  present 
work.  I  may  add  here,  that  in  discussing  the  difference 
between  "thou  "  and  "you  "  (231-5),  and  the  "  monosyllabic 
foot"  (480-6),  I  was  not  aware  that  I  had  been  anticipated 
by  Mr.  Skeat,  who  has  illustrated  the  former  point  (with 
reference  to  Early  English)  in  William  of  Palerne,  p.  xlii., 

*  The  somewhat  grotesque  name  of  "amphibious  verse  "  (Par.  513)  sprang  in 
this  way  from  class-teaching.  I  have  retained  it,  as  answeiing  its  purpose,  by 
communicating  its  meaning  readily  and  impressively. 


xxiv  PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITION. 

and  the  latter  in  his  Essay  on  the  Metres  of  Chaucer  (vol.  i., 
Aldine  Edition,  London,  1866).  The  copious  Index  to 
Layamon,  edited  by  Sir  Frederick  Madden,  has  also  been  of 
great  service.  I  trust  that,  though  care  has  been  taken  to 
avoid  any  unnecessary  parade  of  Anglo-Saxon,  or  Early 
English,  that  might  interfere  with  the  distinct  object  of  the 
work,  the  information  on  these  points  will  be  found  trust- 
worthy and  useful.  The  Prosody  has  been  revised  throughout 
by  Mr.  A.  J.  Ellis,  whose  work  on  Early  English  Pronun- 
ciation is  well  known.  Mr.  Ellis's  method  of  scansion  and 
notation  is  not  in  all  respects  the  same  as  my  own,  but  I 
have  made  several  modifications  in  consequence  of  his 
suggestive  criticisms. 

I  have  now  only  to  express  my  hope  that  this  little  book 
may  do  something  to  forward  the  development  of  English 
instruction  in  English  schools.  Taking  the  very  lowest 
ground,  I  believe  that  an  intelligent  study  of  English  is  the 
shortest  and  safest  way  to  attain  to  an  intelligent  and  suc- 
cessful study  of  Latin  and  Greek,  and  that  it  is  idle  to  expect 
a  boy  to  grapple  with  a  sentence  of  Plato  or  Thucydides  if 
he  cannot  master  a  passage  of  Shakespeare  or  a  couplet  of 
Pope.  Looking,  therefore,  at  the  study  of  English  from  the 
old  point  of  view  adopted  by  those  who  advocate  a  purely 
classical  instruction,  I  am  emphatically  of  opinion  that  it  is 
a  positive  gain  to  classical  studies  to  deduct  from  them  an 
hour  or  two  every  week  for  the  study  of  English.  But  I 
need  scarcely  say  that  the  time  seems  not  far  off  when  every 
English  boy  who  continues  his  studies  to  the  age  of  fifteen 
will  study  English  for  the  sake  of  English  ;  and  where  English 
is  studied  Shakespeare  is  not  likely  to  be  forgotten. 

E.  A.  A. 

3o///  J/rfj',  1870. 


PREFACE  TO  FIRST  EDITION. 


THE  object  of  this  work  is  to  furnish  students  of  Shakespeare 
and  Bacon  with  a  short  systematic  account  of  some  points  of 
difference  between  Elizabethan  syntax  and  our  own.  The 
words  of  these  authors  present  but  little  difficulty.  They  can 
be  understood  from  glossaries,  and,  even  without  such  aid, 
a  little  reflection  and  attention  to  the  context  will  generally 
enable  us  to  hit  the  meaning.  But  the  differences  of  idiom 
are  more  perplexing.  They  are  more  frequent  than  mere 
verbal  difficulties,  and  they  are  less  obvious  and  noticeable. 
But  it  need  hardly  be  said,  that  if  we  allow  ourselves  to  fancy 
we  are  studying  Shakespeare  critically,  when  we  have  not 
noticed  and  cannot  explain  the  simplest  Shakespearian 
idiom,  we  are  in  danger  of  seriously  lowering  our  standard 
of  accurate  study,  and  so  far  from  training  we  are  untraining 
our  understanding.  Nor  is  it  enough  to  enumerate  unusual 
idioms  without  explaining  them.  Such  is  not  the  course  we 
pursue  in  Latin  and  Greek,  and  our  native  tongue  should 
either  not  be  studied  critically  at  all,  or  be  studied  as 
thoroughly  as  the  languages  of  antiquity.* 

The  difficulty  which  the  author  has  experienced  in  teach- 
ing pupils  to  read  Shakespearian  verse  correctly,  and  to 
analyse  a  metaphorical  expression,  has  induced  him  to 
add  a  few  pages  on  Shakespeare's  prosody  and  on  the  use  of 
simile  and  metaphor. 

*  Of  course  it  is  possible  to  study  Shakespeare  with  great  advantage,  and  yet 
without  any  reference  to  textual  criticism.  Only,  it  should  be  distinctly  undei- 
stood  in  such  cases  that  textual  criticism  is  not  attempted. 


2  PREFACE  TO  FIRST  EDITION. 

A  very  important  question  in  the  study  of  English  is,  what 
should  be  the  amount  and  nature  of  the  assistance  given  to 
students  in  the  shape  of  notes.  It  is  clear  that  the  mere 
getting  up  and  reproducing  a  commentator's  opinions,  though 
the  process  may  fill  a  boy  with  useful  information,  can  in  no 
sense  be  called  a  training.  In  the  Notes  and  Questions  at 
the  end  of  this  volume  I  have  tried  to  give  no  more  help 
than  is  absolutely  necessary.  The  questions  may  be  of  use 
as  a  holiday-task,  or  in  showing  the  student  how  to  work 
the  Grammar.  They  have  been  for  the  most  part  answered 
by  a  class  of  boys  from  fourteen  to  sixteen  years  old,  and 
some  by  boys  much  younger. 

In  some  of  the  sections  of  the  Prosody  I  must  acknow- 
ledge my  obligations  to  Mr.  W.  S.  Walker's  work  on  Shake- 
speare's Versification.*  Other  obligations  are  acknowledged 
in  the  course  of  the  work ;  but  the  great  mass  of  the  exam- 
ples have  been  collected  in  the  course  of  several  years'  close 
study  of  Shakespeare  and  contemporaneous  authors.  I  am 
aware  that  there  will  be  found  both  inaccuracies  and  incom- 
pleteness in  this  attempt  to  apply  the  rules  of  classical 
scholarship  to  the  criticism  of  Elizabethan  English,  but  it  is 
perhaps  from  a  number  of  such  imperfect  contributions  that 
there  will  at  last  arise  a  perfect  English  Grammar. 


REFERENCES. 
The  following  works  are  referred  to  by  the  pages  : — 

Ascham's  Scholemaster  .  (Mayor)  .  London,  1863. 

The  Advancement  of  Learning    .     .  Oxford,  1640. 

Bacon's  Essays      .     .     .  (Wright)  .  London,  1868. 

Ben  Jonson's  Works  .    .  (Gifford)  .  London,  1838. 

North's  Plutarch London,  1656. 

Florio's  Montaigne London,  1603. 

*  In  correcting  the  proof-sheets  I  have  gained    much   from  consulting  Mr. 
Walker's  "  Criticisms  on  Shakespeare." 


PREFACE  TO  FIRST  EDITION.  3 

Wager,  Heywood,  Ingelend,  &c.,  and  sometimes  Beaumont 
and  Fletcher,  are  quoted  from  "  The  Songs  of  the  Dra- 
matists," J.  W.  Parker,  1855. 


WORKS   REFERRED  TO   BY  ABBREVIATIONS. 

Some  of  the  plays  of  Shakespeare  are  indicated  by  the 
initials  of  the  titles,  as  follow : 

A.  IV. All's  Well  that  Ends  Well 

A.  and  C.     .     .     .     Antony  and  Cleopatra. 
A.Y.L As  You  Like  It. 

C.  of  E.    .     .     .     .  Comedy  of  Errors. 

J.  C. Julius  Caesar. 

L.  L.  L Love's  Labour  Lost. 

M.for  M.     .     .     .  Measure  for  Measure. 

M.  of  V.  .     .     .     .  Merchant  of  Venice. 

M.  W.  ofW.    .     .  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor. 

M.  N.  D Midsummer  Night's  Dream. 

M.  Ado    ....  Much  Ado  about  Nothing. 

P.ofT.    .     .     .     .  Pericles  of  Tyre. 

R.  and  J.      .     .     .  Romeo  and  Juliet. 

T.  of  Sh Taming  of  the  Shrew. 

T.  of  A Timon  of  Athens. 

T.  A Titus  Andronicus. 

Tr.  and  Cr.  .     .     .  Troilus  and  Cressida. 

T.  N. Twelfth  Night. 

T.  G.ofV..    .     .  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona. 

W.  T. Winter's  Tale. 

(The  quotations  are  from  the  Globe  edition  unless  other- 
wise specified.) 

Asch Ascham's  Scholemaster. 

B.  E Bacon's  Essays. 

B.  and  F.    .     .     .     Beaumont  and  Fletcher 

B.  J Ben  Jonson. 

B  2 


4  PKEFACR  TO  FIRST  EDITION. 

B.  J.   E.  in  &c.    .  Every  Man  in  his  Humour. 

„      E.  out  &>c.  .  Every  Man  out  of  his  Humour. 

„      Cy.'s  Rw.    .  Cynthia's  Revels. 

„      Si/.  Worn.   .  Silent  Woman. 

Xfjan.     .    .  Sejanus. 

„      Sad  S/i.  .    .  Sad  Shepherd. 

/..  G Lover's  Complaint. 

N.  P. North's  Plutarch. 

/'•  P Passionate  Pilgrim. 

R.  of  L Rape  of  Lucrece. 

Sonn Shakespeare's  Sonnets. 

V.  and  /I.    ...  Venus  and  Adonis. 

Numbers  in  parentheses  thus  (81)  refer  to  the  paragraphs 
of  the  Grammar. 


INTRODUCTION. 


ELIZABETHAN  English,  on  a  superficial  view,  appears  to 
present  this  great  point  of  difference  from  the  English  of 
modern  times,  that  in  the  former  any  irregularities  whatever, 
whether  in  the  formation  of  words  or  in  the  combination  of 
words  into  sentences,  are  allowable.  In  the  first  place,  almost 
any  part  of  speech  can  be  used  as  any  other  part  of  speech. 
An  adverb  can  be  used  as  a  verb, "  They  askance  their  eyes  " 
(A'.  o/L.};  as  a  noun,  "the  backward  and  abysm  of  time'* 
(Sonn.} ;  or  as  an  adjective,  "a  seldom  pleasure"  (Sonti.}.  Any 
noun,  adjective,  or  neuter  verb  can  be  used  as  an  active 
verb.  You  can  "  happy  "  your  friend,  "  malice  "  or  "  foot " 
your  enemy,  or  "fall"  an  axe  on  his  neck.  An  adjective  can 
be  used  as  an  adverb  ;  and  you  can  speak  and  act  "  easy," 
"  free,"  "excellent:"  or  as  a  noun,  and  you  can  talk  of 
"fair"  instead  of  "beauty,"  and  "a  pale"  instead  of  "a 
paleness."  Even  the  pronouns  are  not  exempt  from  these 
metamorphoses.  A  "  he  "  is  used  for  a  man,  and  a  lady  is 
described  by  a  gentleman  as  "  the  fairest  she  he  has  yet 
beheld."  Spenser  asks  us  to 

"  Come  down  and  learne  the  little  what 
That  Thomalin  can  sayne." — Calend.  JuL  v.  31  (Nares). 

And    Heywood,    after    dividing    human    diners   into    three 
classes  thus — 

"  Some  with  small  fare  they  be  not  pleased, 
Some  with  much  fare  they  be  diseased, 
Some  with  mean  fare  be  scant  appeased," 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

adds  with  truly  Elizabethan  freedom — 

"  But  of  all  somes  none  is  displeased 

To  be  welcome."* 

In  the  second  place,  every  variety  of  apparent  grammatical 
inaccuracy  meets  us.  He  for  hint,  htm  for  he;  spoke  and 
took,  for  spoken  and  taken;  plural  nominatives  with  singular 
verbs ;  relatives  omitted  where  they  are  now  considered 
necessary  ;  unnecessary  antecedents  inserted  ;  shall  for  "will, 
should  for  would,  would  for  wish;  to  omitted  after  "  I 
ought?  inserted  after  "I  durst;"  double  negatives;  double 
comparatives  ("  more  better,"  &c.)  and  superlatives ;  such 
followed  by  which,  that  by  as,  as  used  for  as  if;  that  for  so 
that;  and  lastly,  some  verbs  apparently  with  two  nomina- 
tives, and  others  without  any  nominative  at  all.  To  this 
long  list  of  irregularities  it  may  be  added  that  many  words, 
and  particularly  prepositions  and  the  infinitives  of  verbs, 
are  used  in  a  different  sense  from  the  modern.  Thus — 

"  To  fright  you  thus  me  thinks  I  am  too  savage," — 

Macb.  iv.  2.  70. 

does  not  mean  "  I  am  too  savage  to  fright  you."  "  Re- 
ceived of  the  most  pious  Edward"  (170)  does  not  mean 
"from  Edward,"  but  "by  Edward;"  and  when  Shakespeare 
says  that  "  the  rich  "  will  not  every  hour  survey  his  treasure, 
"for  blunting  the  fine  point  of  seldom  pleasure,"  he  does 
not  mean  "for  the  sake  of,"  but  "for  fear  of"  blunting 
pleasure. 

On  a  more  careful  examination,  however,  these  apparently 
disorderly  and  inexplicable  anomalies  will  arrange  themselves 
under  certain  heads.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  Eliza- 
bethan was  a  transitional  period  in  the  history  of  the  English 
language.  On  the  one  hand,  there  was  the  influx  of  new  dis- 
coveries and  new  thoughts  requiring  as  their  equivalent  the 
coinage  of  new  words  (especially  words  expressive  of  abstract 
ideas) ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  revival  of  classical  studies  and 
the  popularity  of  translations  from  Latin  and  Greek  authors 

•  Compare  "  More  by  all  mores."— T.  N.  v.  1. 139. 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

suggested  Latin  and  Greek  words  (but  principally  Latin)  as 
the  readiest  and  most  malleable  metal,  or  rather  as  so  many 
ready-made  coins  requiring  only  a  slight  national  stamp  to 
prepare  them  for  the  proposed  augmentation  of  the  currency 
of  the  language.  Moreover,  the  long  and  rounded  periods 
of  the  ancients  commended  themselves  to  the  ear  of  the 
Elizabethan  authors.  In  the  attempt  to  conform  English 
to  the  Latin  frame,  the  constructive  power  of  the  former 
language  was  severely  strained. 

The  necessity  of  avoiding  ambiguity  and  the  difficulty  of 
connecting  the  end  of  a  long  sentence  with  the  beginning, 
gave  rise  to  some  irregularities,  to  the  redundant  pronoun 
(242),  the  redundant  'that'  (285),  and  the  irregular  lto'  (416). 

But,  for  the  most  part,  the  influence  of  the  classical  lan- 
guages was  confined  to  single  words,  and  to  the  rhythm  of 
the  sentence.  The  syntax  was  mostly  English  both  in  its 
origin  and  its  development,  and  several  constructions  that 
are  now  called  anomalous  (such  as  the  double  negative  [406] 
and  the  double  comparative  [409])  have,  and  had  from  the 
earliest  period,  an  independent  existence  in  English,  and 
are  merely  the  natural  results  of  a  spirit  which  preferred 
clearness  and  vigour  of  expression  to  logical  symmetry. 
Many  of  the  anomalies  above  mentioned  may  be  traced 
back  to  some  peculiarities  of  Early  English,  modified  by 
the  transitional  Elizabethan  period.  Above  all,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  Early  English  was  far  richer  than  Eliza- 
bethan English  in  inflections.  As  far  as  English  inflections 
are  concerned  the  Elizabethan  period  was  destructive  rather 
than  constructive.  Naturally,  therefore,  while  inflections 
were  being  discarded,  all  sorts  of  tentative  experiments  were 
made :  some  inflections  were  discarded  that  we  have  restored, 
others  retained  that  we  have  discarded.  Again,  sometimes 
where  inflections  were  retained  the  sense  of  their  meaning 
and  power  had  been  lost,  and  at  other  times  the  memory 
of  inflections  that  were  no  longer  visibly  expressed  in  writing 
still  influenced  the  manner  of  expression.  Thus  Ben  Jonson 
writes  : — 


g  INTRODUCTION. 

"  The  persons  plural  keep  the  termination  of  the  first  per- 
son singular.  In  former  times,  till  about  the  reign  of  King 
Henry  VIII.  they  were  wont  to  be  formed  by  adding  en 
thus  :—  Loven,  say*«,  complains.  But  now  (whatsoever  is 
the  cause)  it  is  quite  grown  out  of  use,  and  that  other  so 
generally  prevailed  that  I  dare  not  presume  to  set  this  on 
foot  again." 

He  appears  to  be  aware  of  the  Midland  plural  in  en  (332) 
which  is  found  only  very  rarely  in  Spenser  and  in  Pericles  of 
Tyre,  but  not  of  the  Northern  plural  in  es  (333),  which  is  very 
frequently  found  in  Shakespeare,  and  which  presents  the 
apparent  anomaly  of  a  plural  noun  combined  with  a  singular 
verb.  And  the  same  author  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  of 
the  existence  of  the  subjunctive  mood  in  English.  He 
ignores  it  in  his  "  Etymology  of  a  Verb,"  and,  in  the  chapter 
on  "  Syntax  of  a  Verb  with  a  Noun,"  writes  as  follows  : — 

"  Nouns  signifying  a  multitude,  though  they  be  of  the 
singular  number,  require  a  verb  plural  : 

"  '  And  wise  men  rehearsen  in  sentence, 

Where  folk  be  drunken  there  is  no  resistance.'" — LYDGATE,  lib.ii. 

And  he  continues  thus  :  — "  This  exception  is  in  other 
nouns  also  very  common,  especially  when  the  verb  is  joined 
to  an  adverb  or  conjunction  :  '  It  is  preposterous  to  execute 
a  man  before  he  have  been  condemned.'"  It  would  appear 
hence  that  the  dramatist  was  ignorant  of  the  force  of  the 
inflection  of  the  subjunctive,  though  he  frequently  uses  it. 
Among  the  results  of  inflectional  changes  we  may  set  down 
the  following  anomalies: — 

I.  Inflections  discarded  but  their  power  retained.  Hence 
(a)"  spoke"  (343)  for  "spoken,"  "rid"  for  "ridden."* 
(b)  "  You  ought  not  walk"  for  "  You  ought  not  walk^«  " 
(the  old  infinitive),  (c)  The  new  infinitive  (357)  "to  walk" 
used  in  its  new  meaning  and  also  sometimes  retaining  its  old 
gerundive  signification.!  (d)  To  "glad"  (act.),  to  "mad" 

*  It  should,  however,  be  stated  that  the  »  is  often  dropped  in  Early  English, 
t  Morris,  "Specimens  of  Early  English,"  p.  xxxiii.     Inf.  "loven."     Gerund, 
"  to  lovcnc." 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

(act.), &c.  (290)  for  to  "gladden,"  "madden,"  &c.  (e}  The 
adverbial  e  (i)  being  discarded,  an  adjective  appears  to 
be  used  as  an  adverb  :  "He  raged  more  fierce?  &c. 
(/)  "Other"  is  used  for  "other(e),"  pi.  "other  men,"  &c. 
(g)  The  ellipsis  of  the  pronoun  (399)  as  a  nominative  may 
also  be  in  part  thus  explained. 

II.  Inflections  retained  with  their  old  power. 

(a)  The  subjunctive  inflection  frequently  used  to  express  a 
condition — "  Go  not  my  horse,"  for  "  If  my  horse  go  not." 
Hence  (b)  as  with  the  subj.  appears  to  be  used  for  as  if,  and 
for  and  if,  but  (in  the  sense  of  except}  for  except  if,  &c. 
(c)  The  plural  in  en;  very  rarely,  (d)  The  plural  in  es  or 
s ;  far  more  commonly,  (e)  His  used  as  the  old  genitive  of 
he  for  of  him.  Me,  him,  &c.  used  to  represent  other  cases 
beside  the  objective  and  the  modern  dative  :  "  I  am  ap- 
pointed him  to  murder  you." 

III.  Inflections    retained   but    their  power    diminished 
or  lost. 

(a)  Thus  'he'  for  'him,'  'him'  for  'he;'  'I'  for  'me,' 
1  me '  for  '/,'  &c.  (b}  In  the  same  way  the  s  which  was  the 
sign  of  the  possessive  case  had  so  far  lost  its  meaning  that, 
though  frequently  retained,  it  was  sometimes  replaced  (in 
mistake)  by  his  and  her. 

IV.  Other  anomalies  may  be  explained  by  reference  to  the 
derivations  of  words  and  the  idioms  of  Early  English. 

Hence  can  be  explained  (a)  so  followed  by  as;  (b}  such 
followed  by  which  (found  in  E.  E.  sometimes  in  the  form 
whuch  or  witch)  ;  (c)  that  followed  by  as;  (d)  who  followed 
by  he;  (e)  the  which  put  for  which;  (/)  shall  for  will,  should 
for  would,  and  would  for  wish. 

The  four  above-mentioned  causes  are  not  sufficient  to 
explain  all  the  anomalies  of  Elizabethan  style.  There  are 
several  redundancies,  and  still  more  ellipses,  which  can  only 
be  explained  as  follows. 

V.  (a)  Clearness  was  preferred  to   grammatical  correct- 
ness, and  (b}   brevity   both    to    correctness    and   clearness. 
Hence  it  was  common  to  place  words  in  the  order  in  which 


io  INTRODUCTION. 

they  came  uppermost  in  the  mind  without  much  regard  to 
syntax,  and  the  result  was  a  forcible  and  perfectly  unambi- 
guous but  ungrammatical  sentence,  such  as  : 

(a)  "The  prince  that  feeds  great  natures  they  will  sway  him." 

B.  J.  Sejanus. 

(ft)  As  instances  of  brevity  : — 

"  Be  guilty  of  my  death  since  of  my  crime." — R.  of  L. 

"  It  cost  more  to  get  than  to  lose  in  a  day." — B.  J.  Poetaster. 

VI.  One  great  cause  of  the  difference  between  Elizabethan 
and  Victorian  English  is,  that  the  latter  has  introduced  or 
developed  what  may  be  called  the  division  of  labour.  A  few 
examples  will  illustrate  this. 

The  Elizabethan  subjunctive  (see  VERBS,  SUBJUNCTIVE) 
could  be  used  (i)  optatively,  or  (2)  to  express  a  condition  or  (3) 
a  consequence  of  a  condition,  (4)  or  to  signify  purpose  after 
"  that."  Now,  all  these  different  meanings  are  expressed  by 
different  auxiliaries— "  would  that  !"  "should  he.  come,"  "he 
would  find,"  "  that  he  tnay  see," — and  the  subjunctive  inflec- 
tion is  restricted  to  a  few  phrases  with  "  if."  "  To  walk  "  is 
now  either  (i)  a  noun,  or  (2)  denotes  a  purpose,  "  in  order  to 
walk."  In  Elizabethan  English,  "to  walk"  might  also  denote 
"  by  walking,"  "  as  regards  walking,"  "for  walking ;"  a  licence 
now  discarded,  except  in  one  or  two  common  phrases,  such 
as  "  I  am  happy  to  say,"  &c.  Similarly,  Shakespeare  could 
write  " tf/"  vantage"  for  "from  vantage-ground,"  "of  charity " 
for  "for  charity's  sake"  "of  mine  honour"  for  "on  my 
honour,"  "tf/"  purpose  "  for  "on  purpose,"  "  of  the  city's  cost" 
for  "at  the  city's  cost,"  "of  his  body"  for  "as  regards  his 
life,"  "made  peace  of  enmity"  for  "peace  instead  of  enmity," 
"  we  shall  find  a  shrewd  contriver  of  him "  for  "  in  him," 
"  did  I  never  speak  of  all  that  time "  for  "  during  all  that 
time."  Similarly  "by"  has  been  despoiled  of  many  of  its 
powers,  which  have  been  divided  among  "  near,"  "  in  accord- 
ance with,"  "  by  reason  of,"  "  owing  to."  "  But "  has  been 
forced  to  cede  some  of  its  provinces  to  "unless"  and  "ex- 
cept." Lastly,  "  that,"  in  Early  English  the  only  relative, 


INTROD  UC  TION.  1 1 

had  been  already,  before  the  Elizabethan  times,  supplanted  in 
;many  idioms  by  "who"  and  "which;"  but  it  still  retained 
its  meanings  of  "because,"  "inasmuch  as,"  and  "when;" 
sometimes  under  the  forms  "for  that"  "in  that;"  sometimes 
without  the  prepositions.  These  it  has  now  lost,  except  in 
a  few  colloquial  phrases. 

As  a  rule,  then,  the  tendency  of  the  English  language  has 
been  to  divide  the  labour  of  expression  as  far  as  possible  by 
diminishing  the  task  assigned  to  overburdened  words  and 
imposing  it  upon  others.  There  are,  of  course,  exceptions  to 
this  rule — notably  "who"  and  "which  ;"  but  this  has  been 
the  general  tendency.  And  in  most  cases  it  will  be  found 
that  the  Victorian  idiom  is  clearer  but  less  terse  than  the 
corresponding  Elizabethan  idiom  which  it  has  supplanted. 

VII.  The  character  of  Elizabethan  English  is  impressed 
upon  its  pronunciation,  as  well  as  upon  its  idioms  and  words. 
As  a  rule  their  pronunciation  seems  to  have  been  more  rapid 
than  ours.  Probably  the  greater  influence  of  spoken  as 
compared  with  written  English,  sanctioned  many  contractions 
which  would  now  be  judged  intolerable  if  for  the  first  time 
introduced.  (See  461.)  This,  however,  does  not  explain  the 
singular  variation  of  accent  upon  the  same  words  in  the 
same  author.  Why  should  "  exile,"  "  aspect,"  "  confessor," 
and  many  other  words,  be  accented  now  on  the  first,  now 
on  the  second  syllable?  The  answer  is,  that  during  the 
unsettled  Elizabethan  period  the  foreign  influence  was 
contending  with  varying  success  against  the  native  rules  of 
English  pronunciation.  The  English  rule,  as  given  by  Ben 
Jonson,  is  definite  enough.  "  In  dissyllabic  simple  nouns  " 
(by  which  it  is  to  be  supposed  he  means  un-compounded), 
"the  accent  is  on  the  first,  as  'bdlief,'  'hdnour/  &c."  But  he 
goes  on  to  say,  that  "  all  verbs  coming  from  the  Latin,  either 
of  the  supine  or  otherwise,  hold  the  accent  as  it  is  found  in 
the  first  person  present  of  those  Latin  verbs."  Hence  a 
continual  strife  over  every  noun  derived  from  Latin  parti- 
ciples :  the  English  language  claiming  the  new  comer  as  her 
naturalized  subject,  bound  by  English  laws ;  the  Latin,  on  the 


12  INTRODUCTION. 

other  hand,  asserting  a  partial  jurisdiction  over  her  emigrants. 
Hence  access  and  access,  precept  and  precept,  contract  (noun) 
and  cdntract,  instinct  and  instinct,  relapse  and  relapse.  The 
same  battle  raged  over  other  Latin  words  not  derived  from 
participles  :  commerce  and  cdmmerce,  obdurate  and  obdurate, 
sepiilchre  and  sfyulchre,  contrary  and  cdntrary,  authdrize 
and  authorize,  persfoer  and  persevere,  cdnfessor  and  confessor. 
The  battle  terminated  in  a  thoroughly  English  manner.  An 
arbitrary  compromise  has  been  effected  between  the  com- 
batants. Respect,  relapse,  success,  successor,  were  ceded  to  the 
Latin:  aspect,  cdllapse*  access,  sepulchre,  were  appropriated 
by  the  English.  But  while  the  contest  was  pending,  and  pri- 
soners being  taken  and  retaken  on  either  side,  we  must 
not  be  surprised  at  finding  the  same  word  ranged  now  under 
native,  now  under  foreign  colours. 

VIII.  Words  then  used  literally  are  now  used  metaphori- 
cally, and  vice  versd. 

The  effect  of  this  is  most  apparent  in  the  altered  use  of 
prepositions.  For  instance,  "  by,"  originally  meaning  "  near," 
has  supplanted  "  of"  in  the  metaphorical  sense  of  agency,  as 
it  may  in  its  turn  be  supplanted  by  "  with  "  or  some  other 
preposition.  This  is  discussed  more  fully  under  the  head  of 
prepositions  (138).  Here  a  few  illustrations  will  be  given  from 
other  words.  It  is  not  easy  to  discover  a  defined  law 
regulating  changes  of  metaphor.  There  is  no  reason  why 
we  should  not,  with  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  talk  of  living 
at  a  "dccp-\  rate"  as  well  as  a  "high  rate."  .But  it  will 
be  found  with  respect  to  many  words  derived  from  Latin  and 
Greek,  that  the  Elizabethans  used  them  literally  and  gene- 
rally; we,  metaphorically  and  particularly.  Thus  "  meta- 
physical "  was  used  by  Shakespeare  in  the  broader  meaning 
of  "  supernatural ; "  and  "  fantastical "  could  be  applied  even 
to  a  murder,  in  the  wide  sense  of  "  imagined."  So  "  exor- 
bitant "  was  "out  of  the  path,"  "uncommon;"  now  only 

*  Collapse  is  accented  on  the  last  syllable  in  most  dictionaries, 
t       "  How  brave  lives  he  that  keeps  a  fool,  although  the  rate  be  deefer, 
But  he  that  is  his  own  fool,  sir,  does  live  a  great  deal  cheaper." 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

applied  to  that  which  is  uncommonly  "expensive."  So 
extravagant  ("  The  extravagant  and  erring  spirit,"  Hamlet, 
i.  i)  has  been  restricted  to  "  'wandering  beyond  the  bounds 
of  economy."  "  To  aggravate "  now  means,  except  when 
applied  to  disease,  "  to  add  to  the  mental  burdens  of  any 
one,"  hence  "to  vex  ;"  but  in  Sonn.  146  we  find  "to  aggra- 
vate thy  store "  in  the  literal  sense  of  "  to  add  to  the 
weight  of"  or  "increase."  So  "journall"  meant  "diurnal" 
or  "  daily  ; "  now  it  is  restricted  to  a  "  daily  "  newspaper  or 
memoir.  The  fact  is  that,  in  the  influx  of  Greek  and  Latin 
words  into  the  English  language,  many  were  introduced  to 
express  ideas  that  either  could  be,  or  were  already,  expressed 
in  the  existing  vocabulary.  Thus  we  do  not  require  "  meta- 
physical "  to  express  that  which  is  supernatural,  nor  "  fantas- 
tical" to  express  that  which  is  imagined;  "exorbitant"  is 
unnecessary  in  the  sense  of  "uncommon;"  "extravagant" 
(though  it  has  a  special  force  in  "  the  extravagant  and  erring 
spirit,"  Hamlet,  i.  i)  is  not  in  most  cases  so  obvious  as 
"wandering  ;"  "increase"  is  simpler  than  "  aggravate,"  and 
"daily"  more  English  than  "diurnal."  Similarly  "specula- 
tion "  is  unnecessary  to  express  the  power  of  seeing,  "  adver- 
tised" useless  in  the  sense  of  "warned"  or  "informed"  (Lear, 
iv.  6.  214),  "vulgar"  in  the  sense  of  common.  Such  words, 
once  introduced  into  the  language,  finding  the  broader  room 
which  they  had  been  intended  to  fill  already  occupied,  were 
forced  to  take  narrower  meanings.  They  did  this,  for  the 
most  part,  by  confining  themselves  to  one  out  of  many 
meanings  which  they  had  formerly  represented,  or  by  adopt- 
ing metaphorical  and  philosophical  instead  of  literal  and 
material  significations  ;  and  as  the  sense  of  their  derivation 
and  original  meaning  became  weaker,  the  transition  became 
easier.  This  is  not  merely  true  of  words  derived  from  Latin 
and  Greek.  "  Travail,"  for  example,  finding  itself  supplanted 
in  its  original  sense  by  "  work "  or  "  labour,"  has  narrowed 
itself  to  a  special  meaning  :  the  same  is  true  of  "  beef," 
"  pork,"  &c. 

On    the  other  hand,  some  Latin  and  Greek  words  that 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

express  technicalities  have,  as  the  sense  of  their  exact 
meaning  was  weakened,  gradually  become  more  loosely  and 
generally  used.  Thus,  "  influence "  means  now  more  than 
the  mere  influence  of  the  stars  on  men  ;  "  triumph,"  "  pre- 
posterous," "pomp,"  "  civil,"  "ovation,"  and  "decimate,"  have 
lost  much  of  their  technical  meaning.  Of  these  words  it 
may  be  said,  that  Shakespeare  uses  them  more  literally  and 
particularly  than  we  do.  Thus,  "triumph"  is  used  for  a 
show  at  a  festival ;  "  civil "  is  used  for  peaceful ;  "  pre- 
posterous ass"  (T.  of  Sh.  iii.  I.  9)  is  applied  to  a  man  who 
put  music  before  philosophy ;  "decimation  "  (T.  of  A.  v.  I.  31) 
is  used  in  its  technical  sense  for  "  a  tithed  death." 

One  cause  that  has  affected  the  meaning  of  Latin-derived 
words  has  been  the  preference  with  which  they  have  been 
selected  in  order  to  express  depreciation.  This  has  narrowed 
some  words  to  an  unfavourable  signification  which  they  did 
not  originally  possess.  Thus,  "  impertinent "  in  Elizabethan 
authors  meant  "not  to  the  point;"  "officious"  could  then 
mean  "  obliging,"  and  a  clever  person  could  be  described  as 
"  an  admirable  conceited  fellow  "  ( W.  T.  iv.  4.  203). 

A  classical  termination  (446)  may  sometimes  be  treated 
as  active  or  as  passive.  Hence  "plausibly"  is  used  for  "with 
applause"  actively. 

"The  Romans  plausibly  did  give  consent." — R.  of  L. 

"A  very  inconsiderate  (inconsiderable)  handful  of  English." 

N.  P.  Appendix  31. 

Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  we  have  "  ftuxive  eyes  "  (eyes  flowing 
with  tears  :  L.  C.  8),  and  on  the  other  the  more  common 
passive  sense,  as  "the  inexpresj/w  she"  (the  woman  whose 
praises  cannot  be  expressed). 

With  respect  to  words  of  English  or  French  origin,  it  is 
more  difficult  to  establish  any  rule.  All  that  can  be  said  is 
that  the  Elizabethan,  as  well  as  the  Victorian  meaning,  may 
be  traced  to  the  derivation  of  the  word.  Why,  for  instance, 
should  not  Ben  Jonson  write — 

"Frost  fearing  myrtle  shall  impale  my  head."— Poetast.  i.  I. 


INTRODUCTION.  15 

i.e.  "  take  in  within  its  pale,  surround,"  as  justifiably  as  we 
use  the  word  in  its  modern  sense  of  "  transfixing  ? "  Why 
should  not  sirens  "train"  (draw  or  decoy — trahere)  their 
victims  to  destruction,  as  well  as  educators  "train"  their  pupils 
onward  on  the  path  of  knowledge  ?  We  talk  of  "  a  world  of 
trouble  "  to  signify  an  infinity  ;  why  should  not  Bacon  (E.  38) 
talk  of  "a  globe  of  precepts?"  Owing  to  the  deficiency  of 
their  vocabulary,  and  their  habit  of  combining  prepositions 
with  verbs,  to  make  distinct  words  almost  like  the  Germans, 
the  Elizabethans  used  to  employ  many  common  English 
words,  such  as  "  pass,"  "  hold,"  "  take,"  in  many  various 
significations.  Thus  we  find  "take"  in  the  sense  of  (i) 
"bewitch;"  (2)  "interrupt"  ("You  take  him  too  quickly, 
Marcius,"  B.  J.  Poetast.}  ;  (3)  "consider"  ("  The  whole  court 
shall  take  itself  abused,"  B.  J.  Cy.'s  Rev.  v.  i)  ;  (4)  "under- 
stand "  ("  You'll  take  him  presently,"  E.  out  frc.  i.  i)  ;  and 
(5)  "resort  to"  ("He  was  driven  by  foule  weather  to  take 
a  poor  man's  cottage,"  N.  P.  597).  With  prepositions  the 
word  has  many  more  meanings.  "  Take  out"="  copy  ;" 
"  take  in"="  subdue ;"  utake  up  "=  "borrow ;"  "  take  in  with  " 
(Bacon)  =  "  side  with;"  "take  up"="pull  up"  of  a  horse. 
And  these  meanings  are  additional  to  the  many  other 
meanings  which  the  word  still  retains.  To  enter  further  into 
the  subject  of  the  formation  and  meaning  of  words  is  not  the 
purpose  of  this  treatise.  .The  glossaries  of  Nares  and  Halli- 
well  supply  the  materials  for  a  detailed  study  of  the  subject. 
One  remark  may  be  of  use  to  the  student  before  referring  him 
to  the  following  pages.  The  enumeration  of  the  points  of 
difference  between  Shakespearian  and  modern  English  may 
seem  to  have  been  a  mere  list  of  irregularities  and  proofs  of 
the  inferiority  of  the  former  to  the  latter.  And  it  is  true  that 
the  former  period  presents  the  English  language  in  a  tran- 
sitional and  undeveloped  condition,  rejecting  and  inventing 
much  that  the  verdict  of  posterity  has  retained  and  discarded. 
It  was  an  age  of  experiments,  and  the  experiments  were  not 
always  successful.  While  we  have  accepted  copious,  inge- 
nious, disloyal,  we  have  rejected  as  useless  copy  (in  the  sense 


16  INTRODUCTION. 

of  "plenty"),  ingin,  and  disnoble.  But  for  freedom,  for  brevity 
and  for  vigour,  Elizabethan  is  superior  to  modern  English. 
Many  of  the  words  employed  by  Shakespeare  and  his  con- 
temporaries were  the  recent  inventions  of  the  age  ;  hence  they 
were  used  with  a  freshness  and  exactness  to  which  we  are 
strangers.*  Again,  the  spoken  English  so  far  predominated 
over  the  grammatical  English  that  it  materially  influenced 
the  rhythm  of  the  verse  (see  Prosody),  the  construction  of 
the  sentence,  and  even  sometimes  (460)  the  spelling  of  words. 
Hence  sprung  an  .artless  and  unlaboured  harmony  which 
seems  the  natural  heritage  of  Elizabethan  poets,  whereas 
such  harmony  as  is  attained  by  modern  authors  frequently 
betrays  a  painful  excess  of  art.  Lastly,  the  use  of  some  few 
still  remaining  inflections  (the  subjunctive  in  particular),  the 
lingering  sense  of  many  other  inflections  that  had  passed 
away  leaving  behind  something  of  the  old  versatility  and 
audacity  in  the  arrangement  of  the  sentence,  the  stern  sub- 
ordination of  grammar  to  terseness,  and  clearness,  and  the 
consequent  directness  and  naturalness  of  expression,  all  con- 
spire to  give  a  liveliness  and  wakefulness  to  Shakespearian 
English  which  are  wanting  in  the  grammatical  monotony  of 
the  present  day.  We  may  perhaps  claim  some  superiority 
in  completeness  and  perspicuity  for  modern  English,  but  if 
we  were  to  appeal  on  this  ground  to  the  shade  of  Shake- 
speare in  the  words  of  Antonio  in  the  Tempest, — 

"  Do  you  not  hear  us  speak  ?" 
we  might  fairly  be  crushed  with  the  reply  of  Sebastian— 

."  I  do  ;  and  surely 
It  is  a  sleepy  language." 

•  Exceptions  are  "eternal"  used  for  "infernal"  (O.  iv.  2,  130;  J.  C.  i.  2. 
160;  Hamlet,  i.  4.  21);  "triple"  for  "third"  (A.  W.  ii.  i.  Ill);  "temporary" 
for  "  temporal"  (M.  for  M.  v.  i.  145);  "  important "  for  "  importunate  "  {Lear, 
i  v.  4.  26);  "expiate  "for  "expired  "(Rich.  III.  iii.  3.  23)  ;  "colleagued"  (//,»«, /,•/", 
i.  a.  21)  for  "  co-leagued  ;"  "  importing  "  (ib.  23)  for  " importuning."  The  Folio 
has  "Pluto's"  for  "Plutus"  (J.  C.  iv.  3.  102). 


GRAMMAR. 


ADJECTIVES. 

1.  Adjectives  are  freely  used  as  Adverbs. 

In  Early  English,  many  adverbs  were  formed  from  adjectives  by 
adding  e  (dative)  to  the  positive  degree  :  as  bright,  adj. ;  brighte,  adv. 
In  time  the  e  was  dropped,  but  the  adverbial  use  was  kept.  Hence, 
from  a  false  analogy,  many  adjectives  (such  as  excellent')  which  could 
never  form  adverbs  in  e,  were  used  as  adverbs.  We  still  say  col- 
loquially, "come  quick;"  "the  moon  shines  bright,"  &c.  But 
Shakespeare  could  say : 

"Which  the  false  man  does  easy." — Macb.  ii.  3.  143. 
"  Some  will  dear  abide  it."— J.  C.  iii.  2.  119. 
"  Thou  didst  it  excellent."— T.  of  Sh.  i.  i.  89. 
"  Which  else  should  free  have  wrought." — Macb.  ii.  I.  19. 
"Raged  more/mvr."— Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  173. 
"  Grow  not  instant  old.'' — Ham.  i.  5.  94. 
"'Tis  noble  spoken."—  A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  99. 
"Did  I  expose  myself /«n?  for  his  love."—  T.  N.v.  i.  86. 
"  Equal  ravenous  as  he  is  subtle." — Hen.  VIII.  i.  i.  159. 
We  find  the  two  forms  of  the  adverb  side  by  side  in : 

"  She  was  new  lodged  and  newly  deified." — L.  C.  84. 
The  position  of  the  article  shows  that  mere  is  an  adverb  in : 

"  Ay,  surely,  mere  the  truth." — A.  W.  iii.  5.  58. 
So        "  It  shall  safe  be  kept."— Cymb.  i.  6.  209. 

"  Heaven  and  our  Lady  gracious  has  it  pleas'd." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  71 

"  (I  know)  when  the  blood  burns  how  prodigal  the  soul 
Lends  the  tongue  vows." — Hamlet,  i.  3.  116. 
C 


!8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Such  transpositions  as  "our  lady  gracious,"  (adj.)  where 
"gracious"  is  a  mere  epithet,  are  not  common  in  Shakespeare. 
(See  419.)  In 

"  My  lady  sweet,  arise,"—  Cymb.  ii.  3.  29. 

"My-lady"  is  more  like  one  word  than  "our  lady,"  and  is  also 
an  appellative.     In   appellations  such  transpositions  are  allowed. 

(See  13.) 

Sometimes  the  two  forms  occur  together : 

"And  she  will  speak  most  bitterly  and  strange."" 

M.forM.  v.  I.  90. 

2.  Adjectives  compounded.  Hence  two  adjectives  were  freely 
combined  together,  the  first  being  a  kind  of  adverb  qualifying  the 
second.  Thus : 

"  I  am  too  sudden-bold." —L.  L.  L.  ii.  i.  107. 

«  Fertile-fresh!*— M.   W.  of  W.  v.  5.  72. 

"  More  active-valiant  or  more  valiant-young" 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  I.  90. 

"Daring-hardy"— Rich.  II.  i.  3.  43. 

"  Honourable-dangerous."— J.  C.  i.  3.  124.     See  ib.  v.  I.  60. 

"He  lies  crafty -sick." —-2.  Hen.  IV.  Prol.  37. 

"  I  am  too  childish-foolish  for  this  world."— R.  III.  i.  3.  142. 

"You  are  too  senseless-obstinate,  my  lord." — R.  III.  iii.  I.  44. 

"That  fools  should  be  so  deep-contemplative"— A.  Y.  ii.  7.  31. 

"  Glouc.  Methinks  the  ground  is  even. 
Edg.  Horrible- steep" — Lear,  iv.  6.  3. 

In  the  last  example  it  is  hard  to  decide  whether  the  two  adjec- 
tives are  compounded,  or  (which  is  much  more  probable)  "horrible" 
is  a  separate  word  used  as  in  (i)  for  "horribly,"  as  in  T.  N.  iii. 
4.  196.  In  the  West  of  England  "terrible"  is  still  used  in  this 
adverbial  sense. 

There  are  some  passages  which  are  only  fully  intelligible  when 
this  combination  is  remembered  : 

"  A  strange  tongue  makes  my  cause  more  strange-suspicious" 

Hen.  VIII.  iii.  I.  45. 
Erase  the  usual  comma  after  "strange." 

"  Here  is  a  siliy-stately  style  indeed." — I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  7.  72. 
Perhaps  "  He  only  in  z.  general -honest  thought." — J.  C  v.  5.  71. 


ADJECTIVES.  ig 

3.  Adjectives,  especially  those  ending  in  ful,  less,  ble,  and  ive, 
have  both  an  active  and  a  passive  meaning ;  just  as  we  still  say, 
"  3i fearful  (pass.)  coward,"  and  "  a.  fearful  (act.)  danger." 

"  To  throw  away  the  dearest  thing  he  owed, 

As  'twere  a  careless  trifle." — Macbeth,  i.  4.  11. 
"  Such  helpless  harmes  yt's  better  hidden  keep." — SrEN.  F.  Q.i.$.  42. 
"  Even  as  poor  birds  deceived  with  painted  grapes, 

Like  those  poor  birds  that  helpless  berries  saw." 

V.  and  A.  604 ;  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  13. 
"  Upon  the  sightless  couriers  of  the  air."— Macbeth,  i.  7.  23. 

"  How  dare  thy  joints  forget 
To  pay  their  awful  duty  to  our  presence?" — Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  76. 

"Terrible"  is  "frightened"  in  Lear,  i.  2.  32;  "dreadful," 
"awe-struck,"  Hamlet,  i.  2.  207;  "thankful"  is  "thankworthy," 
P.  of  T.  v.  I.  285.  So  "unmeritable"  (act.  Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  155  ; 
J.  C.  iv.  I.  12) ;  "medicinable"  (act.  Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  44);  "sen- 
sible" (pass.  Macb.  ii.  I.  36  ;  Hamlet,  i.  I.  57);  "  in  suppressing" 
(pass.  J.  C.  ii.  1. 134) ;  "plausive"  (pass.  Hamlet,  i.  4.  30) ;  "incom- 
prehensive"  (pass.  Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  198)  ;  "  respective"  (act.  R.  and 
J.  iii.  I.  128  ;  pass.  T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  200) ;  "  unexpressive "  (pass. 
A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  10);  "comfortable"  (act.  Lear,  i.  4.  328) ;  " deceiv- 
able"  (act.  R.  II.  ii.  3.  84 ;  T.  N.  iv.  3.  21). 

"Probable,"  "contemptible,"  and  "artificial,"  are  active  in — 

"  The  least  of  all  these  signs  vtere probable."— 2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  178. 
'"Tis  very  probable  that  the  man  will  scorn  it,  for  he  hath 
^^—A-  vciy -rontemptibk-zpuji.  '^—M.  Ado,  ii.  3.  188. 

"  We,  Hermia,  like  two  artfoiaTgSfa 

Have  with  our  needles  created  both  one  flower." 

_____  M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  204. 


Hence  even  ' f  '^he^ntreftchant  air. " — 


" Unprizable "  (T.  N.  \.  i.  58)  means  "not  able  to  be  made  a 
prize  of,  captured." 

"Effect"  (Rich.  III.  i.  2.  120)  seems  used  for  "effecter"  or 
"agent  "  if  the  text  is  correct. 

4.  Adjectives  signifying  effect  were  often  used  to  signify  the 
cause.  This  is  a  difference  of  thought.  We  still  say  "pale  death," 
"gaunt  famine,"  where  the  personification  is  obvious  ;  but  we  do  not 
say— 

C   2 


20  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Oppress'd  with  two  weak  evils,  age  and  hunger." 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  132. 
"  Like  as  a  sort  of  hungry  dogs  ymet 
Doe  fall  together,  stryving  each  to  get 
The  greatest  portion  of  the  greedie  pray." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  vi.  n.  17. 

"  And  barren  rage  of  death's  eternal  cold." — Sonn.  13. 
Nor  should  we  say  of  the  Caduceus — 
"  His  sleepy  yerde  in  hond  he  bare  upright."— CH AUG.  C.  T.  1390. 

Compare  also  "  Sixth  part  of  each  ! 

A  trembling  contribution  ! " — Hen.  VIIT.  i.  2.  95. 

Here  "trembling"  is  used  for  "fear-inspiring." 
So  other  Elizabethan  authors  (Walker)  :  "idle  agues,"  "rotten 
showers,"  "barren  curses." 

5.   Adjectives   are  frequently  used    for  Nouns,   even    in    the 
singular. 

"  A  sudden  pale  usurps  her  cheek." — V.  and  A. 

"  Every  Roman's  private  (privacy  or  private  interest)." 

B.  J.  Sejan.  iii.  I. 

"  'Twas  caviare  to  the  general!' — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  458. 
"  Truth  lies  open  to  all.     It  is  no  man's  several.1'1 — B.  J.  Disc.  742  b. 
"  Before  these  bastard  signs  of  fair  (beauty)  were  born." — Sonn.  68. 
So  "/a<>  befal,"  Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  129  ;  Rich.  III.  i.  3.  282.     But 
see  297. 

"Till  fortune,  tired  with  doing  dad, 
Threw  him  ashore  to  give  him  glad." — P.  of  T.  ii.  Gower,  37. 

"That  termless  (indescribable)  hand 

Whose  bare  outbragg'd  the  web  it  seem'd  to  wear." — L.  C.  95. 
"  lu/ew"  =  "in  short."— Hamht,  i.  3.  126;  Temp.  i.  2.  144. 
"  Small  (little)  have  continual  plodders  ever  won." 

L.  L.  L.  i.  i.  86. 

'  By  smattznd  small"— Rich.  I  I.  iii.  7. 198 ;  Rich.  III.  i.  3.  111. 
"  Say  what  you  can,  my/a/se  o'erweighs  your  true." 

M.forM.  ii.  4.  170. 
"  I'll  make  division  of  my  present  (money)  with  you." 

T.  N.  iii.  4.  380. 

If  the  text  were  correct,  the  following  would  be  an  instance  of 
an  adjective  inflected  like  a  noun  : 

"  Have  added  feathers  to  the  learned's  wing."—  Sonn.  78. 
But  probably  the  right  reading  is  "  learned'st." 


ADJECTIVES.  21 

"Wont,"  the  noun  (Hamlet,  i.  4,  6),  is  a  corruption  from 
"woned,"  from  the  verb  "wonye"E.  E.,  "wunian"  A.-S.,  "to 
dwell."  Compare  ^0oy. 

6.  Adjectives  comparative.     The  inflection  er  instead  of  mere 
is  found  before  "  than." 

"  Sir,  your  company  is  fairer  than  honest."  —  M.  for  M.  iv.  3.  185. 

The  comparative  "more  wonderful"  seems  to  be  used,  as  in 
Latin,  for  "more  wonderful  than  usual,"  if  ihe  following  line  is  to 
be  attributed  to  Cicero  as  in  the  editions  : 

"  Why,  saw  you  anything  more  wonderful?"  —  J.  C.  i.  3.  14. 

In  Hamlet  iv.  7-  49,  "my  sudden  and  more  strange  return,"  means 
"  sudden,  and  even  more  strange  than  sudden." 

7.  The  comparative  inflection-^  was  sometimes  used  even 
when  the  positive  ended  \n.-tng,-ed,-id,-ain,-st,-ect.     These  termina- 
tions (perhaps  because  they  assimilate  the  adjective  to  a  participle  by 
their  sound)  generally  now  take  "  more." 

"Horriir,"  Cymb.  iv.  2.  331  ;  "  curj-/<?r,"  T.  of  Sh.  Hi.  2.  156  ; 
"perfater,"  Coriol.  ii.  I.  91  ;  "  certainer,  "  M.  Ado,  v.  3.  62. 

8.  Superlative.     The  superlative  inflection  est,  like  the  Latin 
superlative,  is  sometimes  used  to  signify  "very,"  with  little  or  no 
idea  of  excess. 

"  A  little  ere  the  might/>j/  Julius  fe\\"—  Hamlet,  i.  i.  114. 

"My  mutfsf  conscience"  (Cymb.  i.  6.  116)  may  perhaps  mean 
"the  mutest  part  or  corner  of  my  conscience,"  like  "summus 
mons." 


9.  The  Superlative   inflection    est  is   found   after-*?//,  -/ 

-ect.  Thus,  "\iokntest"  (Coriol.  iv.  6.  73)  ;  "curs^j/"  (M.  of  V.  ii. 
I.  46)  ;  "  lytngest"  (T.  of  Sh.  i.  2.  25)  ;  "  perfarto/,"  (Macb.  i.  5.  2). 
This  use  of  -est  and  -er  (see  7)  is  a  remnant  of  the  indiscriminate 
application  of  these  inflections  to  all  adjectives  which  is  found 
in  Early  English.  Thus,  in  Piers  Plowman,  we  have  "  avarous*r<?" 
(B.  i.  189),  "  merveillous*r/  "  (B.  viii.  68). 

10.  The  Superlative  was   sometimes  used  (as  it  is   still,  but 
with  recognized  incorrectness)  where  only  two  objects  are  compared. 


22  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

11  Between  two  dogs  which  hath  the  deeper  mouth, 
Between  two  blades  which  bears  the  better  temper, 
Between  two  horses  which  doth  bear  him  best, 
Between  two  girls  which  has  the  merr^j/  eye." 

I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  15. 
"Not  to  bestow  my  youngest  daughter 

Before  I  have  a  husband  for  the  elder." — T.  of  Sh.  i.  I.  50. 
"  Of  two  usuries,   the  merriest  was  put  down,  and  the  worser 
allowed."— M.for M.  iii.  2.  7. 

Here  it  seems  used  for  variety  to  avoid  the  repetition  of  the  com- 
parative. 

11.  Comparative  and  superlative  doubled.— The  inflections 

-er  and  -est,  which  represent  the  comparative  and  superlative  degrees 
of  adjectives,  though  retained,  yet  lost  some  of  their  force,  and 
sometimes  received  the  addition  of  more,  most,  for  the  purpose  of 
greater  emphasis. 

"  A  more  larger  list  of  sceptres." — A.  and  C.  iii.  6.  76. 

"  More  elder."— M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  251. 

"  More  better." —Temp,  i.  2.  19. 

"More  nearer." — Hamlet,  ii.  I.  11. 

"Thy  most  worst."—  W.  T.  iii.  2.  180. 

"  More  braver. "—Temp,  i.  2.  439. 

"With  the  most  boldest."— J.  C.  iii.  I.  121. 

"Mostunkindest"—J.  C.  iii.  2.  187. 

"  To  some  more  fitter  place." — M.for  M.  ii.  2.  16. 

"  I  would  have  been  much  more  a  fresher  man." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  6.  21. 

Ben  Jonson  speaks  of  this  as  "  a  certain  kind  of  English  atticism, 
imitating  the  manner  of  the  most  ancientest  and  finest  Grecians." — 
B.  J.  786.  But  there  is  no  ground  for  thinking  that  this  idiom  was 
the  result  of  imitating  Greek.  We  find  Bottom  saying  : 

' '  The  more  better  assurance. " — M.  N.  D.  iii.  1 .  4. 
Note  the  anomaly  :  "Less  happier  lands."— R.  II.  ii.  i.  49. 

12.  The  Adjectives  all,  each,  both,  every,  other,  «ire  some- 
times interchanged  and  used  as  Pronouns  in  a  manner  different 
from  modern  usage. 

All  for  any  : 

"They  were  slaine  without  all  mercie." — HOLINSHED. 
"  Without  all  bail.  "—Sonn.  74. 


ADJECTIVES.  23 

"Without  all  reason." — ASCH.  48. 

(Conip.  in  Latin  "  sine  omni,  &c.")  Heb.  vii.  7  :  Wickliffe,  "  with- 
outen  ony  agenseiyinge  ;"  Rheims,  Geneva,  and  A.  V.  "  without  all 
contradiction." 

This  construction,  which  is  common  in  Ascham  and  Andrewes,  is 
probably  a  Latinism  in  those  authors.     It  may  be,  however,  that  in 
"things  without  all  remedy,"  Macb.  iii.  2.  11,  "without"  is  used  in 
the  sense  of  "outside,"  "beyond."     See  Without  (197)- 
All  for  every : 

"  Good  order  in  all  thyng."— ASCH.  62. 
*'  And  all  thing  unbecoming." — Macb.  iii.  i.  14. 
We  still  use  "all  "  for  "all  men."     But  Ascham  (p.  54)  wrote  : 
" ///  commonlie  have  over  much  wit,"  and  (p.  65)    "Infinite  shall 
be  made  cold  by  your  example,  that  were  never  hurt  by  reading  of 
bookes."     This  is  perhaps  an  attempt  to  introduce  a  Latin  idiom. 
Shakespeare,  however,  writes  : 

"  What  ever  have  been  thought  on." — Coriol.  i.  2.  4. 

Each  for  "all"  or  "each  one  of:" 

"At  each  his  needless  heavings."—  W.  T.  ii.  3.  35. 

So  every  (i.e.  "ever-ich,"    "ever-each"): 

"Of  every  these  happen'd  accidents." — Temp.  v.  I.  249. 
And  "none  :"  "None  our  parts." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  36. 

Each  for  "both  :" 

"  And  each  though  enemies  to  either' s  reign 

Do  in  consent  shake  hands  to  torture  me." — Sonn.  28. 
" Each  in  her  sleep  themselves  so  beautify." — R,  of  L.  404. 

"Tell  me 
In  peace  what  each  of  them  by  the  other  lose"— Coriol.  iii.  2.  44. 

This  confusion  is  even  now  a  common  mistake.     Compare 

"  How  pale  each  worshipful  and  rev' rend  guest 
Rise  from  a  Clergy  or  a  City  feast."— POPE,  Imit.  Hor.  ii.  75. 

Each  for  "  each  other  :  " 

"  But  being  both  from  me,  both  to  each  friend." — Sonn.  144. 
(i.e.  both  friends  each  to  the  other.) 

Both  seems  put  for  "  each,"  or  either  used  for  "  each  other,"  in 
"  They  are  both  in  either' s  powers." —  Temp.  i.  2.  450. 


24  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

There  may,  however,  be  an  ellipsis  Qleach  after  both  : 
"  They  are  both  (each)  in  cither's  powers." 

Compare      "  A  thousand  groans 

Came  (one)  on  another's  neck." — Son  ft.  131. 

It  is  natural  to  conjecture  that  this  is  a  misprint  for  "one  or 
other's."     But  compare 

' '  I  think  there  is  not  half  a  kiss  to  choose 
Who  loves  another  best."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  176.     (See  88.) 

Every  One,  Other,  Neither,  are  used  as  plural  pronouns  : 

"  And  every  one  to  rest  themselves  betake." — R.  of  L. 
4 '  Every  one  of  these  considerations,  syr,  move  me.'1 — ASCH.  Dedic. 

" Everything 
In  readiness  for  Hymenaeus  stand" — T.  A.  i.  i.  325. 

"  Smooth  every  passion 
That  in  the  nature  of  their  lord  rebel." — Lear,  ii.  2.  82. 

"  Every  "  is  a  pronoun  in 

"  \ievery  of  your  wishes  had  a  womb." 

A.  and  C.  i.  2.  38  ;  A.  Y.  L.  v.  4.  180. 
"  Thersites'  body  is  as  good  as  Ajax' 

When  neither  are  alive." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  252. 
"  Other  have  authoritie." — ASCH.  46. 
"  And  therefore  is  the  glorious  planet  Sol 
In  noble  eminence  enthron'd  and  spher'd 
Amidst  the  other." — Tr.  and  C.  i.  3.  89. 

Other  is  also  used  as  a  singular  pronoun  (even  when  not  preceded 
by  "each"):* 

"  Every  time  gentler  than  other" — J.  C.  i.  2.  229. 
"With  greedy  force  each  other  doth  assail."— SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  5.  6. 
i.e.  "each  doth  assail  the  otiose. "—Rich.  II.  i.  i.  22. 

"We  learn  no  other  but  the  confident  tyrant 
Keeps  still  in  Dunsinane." — Macb.  \.  4.  8. 

"  He  hopes  it  is  no  other 

But,  for  your  health  and  your  digestion's  sake, 
An  after-dinner's  breath." — Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  120. 

"  If  you  think  other."— Othello,  iv.  2.  13. 

"Suppose  no  other."— A.  W.  iii.  6.  27. 

It  is  used  as  a  singular  adjective,  without  the  article,  in  Cymb.  iii   4.  H4; 
"  You  think  of  other  place." 


ADJECTIVES.  25 

In  the  two  last  passages  "other"  may  be  used  adverbially  for 
"otherwise,"  as  in  Macbeth,  \.  7.  77,  which  may  explain 

"They  can  be  meek  that  have  no  other  cause."—  C.  of  E.  ii.  I.  33. 
i.e.  "no  cause  otherwise  than  for  meekness." 

The  use  of  all(e)  and  other(e)  as  plural  pronouns  is  consistent  witli 
ancient  usage.  It  was  as  correct  as  "omnes  "  and  "  alii "  in  Latin, 
as  "alle"and  "andere"  in  German.  Our  modern  "others  said" 
is  only  justified  by  a  custom  which  might  have  compelled  us  to  say 
" manys"  or  "a//>  said,"  and  which  has  induced  us  to  say  "our 
betters-,"  though  not  (with  Heywood)  "our  biggerr."  The  plural 
use  of  neither,  "not  both,"  depends  on  the  plural  use  of  either  for 
"both,"  which  is  still  retained  in  "on  either  side,"  used  for  "on  both 
sides,"  This  is  justified  by  the  original  meaning  of  ei-ther,  i.e. 
"every  one  of  two,"  just  as  whe-ther  means  "which  of  two." 
"Either"  in  O.E.  is  found  for  "both."  Similarly  we  say  " none 
ivere  taken  "  instead  of  "  none  (no  one)  was  taken."  We  still  retain 
the  use  of  other  as  a  pronoun  without  the  in  such  phrases  as  "  they 
saw  each  other"  for  "  they  saw  each  the  other."  Many  is  also  used 
as  a  noun.  (See  5. )  Hence  we  have  : 

"  In  many's  looks." — Sonn.  93. 

Beside  the  adjective  "mani,"  "moni"  (many),  there  was  also  in 
Early  English  the  noun  "manie"  or  "meine"  (multitude,  from  Fr. 
"maisgnee,"  Lat.  "minores  natu  ").  But  it  is  doubtful  whether 
this  influenced  the  use  just  mentioned. 

13.  The  possessive  Adjectives,  when  unemphatic,  are  some- 
times transposed,  being  really  combined  with  nouns  (like  the  French 
monsieur,  milord). 

"  Dear  my  lord."— J.  C.  ii.  I.  255. 

"  Good  my  brother." — Hamlet,  i.  3.  46. 

"  Sweet  my  mother." — R.  and  J.  iii.  5.  200. 

"Oh!  poor  our  sex. " — Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  2.  109. 

"  Art  thou  that  my  lord  Elijah?" — I  Kings  xviii.  7. 

"Come,  our  queen." — Cymb.  ii.  3.  68. 
So  probably,  vocatively : 

"  Tongue-tied  our  queen  speak  thou. " — W.  T.  i.  I.  27. 
Compare  "Come  on,  our  queen" — Rich.  II.  i.  2.  222. 

"Good  my  knave."— L.  L.  L.  iii.  I.  153. 


26  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Good  my  friends." — Coriol.  v.  2.  8. 
"Good your  highness,  patience." — A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  106. 
"Good  my  girl."— l  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  25. 
Hence,  by  analogy,  even 

"Good  my  mouse  of  virtue."—  T.  N.  i.  5.  69. 
The  emphatic  nature  of  this  appellative  "good"  is  illustrated  by 

"  Goodnovf,  sit  down." — Hamlet,  i.  I.  70: 

where  the  noun  is  omitted.     So  W.  T.  v.  I.  19  ;  Tempest,  i.  I.  16. 
"Gunnow"  (good  now)  is  still  an  appellative  in  Dorsetshire. 

Sometimes,  but  very  rarely,  the  possessive  adjective  used  voca- 
tively  is  allowed  to  stand  first  in  the  sentence  : 

"  Our  very  loving  sister,  well  be  met." — Lear,  v.  I.  20. 
It  is  possible  that  this  use  of  "my,"  "our,"  £c.  maybe  in  part 
explained   from   their  derivation,    since   they   were    originally   not 
adjectives,  but  the  possessive  cases  of  pronouns.     Thus,  "sweet  my 
mother,"  =  "sweet  mother  of  me,"  or  "sweet  mother  mine." 
Similar  vocatives  are 

"  The  last  of  all  the  Romans,  fare  thee  well."— J.  C.  v.  3.  99. 
"  The  jewels  of  ourfatlier,  with  wash'd  eyes, 
Cordelia  leaves  you." — Lear,  i.  I.  271. 

So  Folio,  ' '  Take  that,  the  likeness  of  this  railer  here. " 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  5.  38  (Globe  "  thou"). 

14.  The  Adjectives  just,  mere,  proper,  and  very  were 

sometimes  used  as  in  Latin. 

Just   =   exact      "  A  just  seven-night." — M.  Ado,  ii.  I.  375. 

"A/«j/pound."— M.  ofV.iv.  I.  327. 

Whereas  we  retain  this  sense  only  in  the  adverbial  use,  "just  a 
week."    Compare  "justum  iter." 

15.  Mere  =  "unmixed  with  anything  else:"  hence,  by  inference, 
"intact,"  "complete." 

"The  mere  perdition  of  the  Turkish  fleet." — 0.  ii.  2.  3. 
i.e.  the  "complete  destruction." 

"  Strangely- visited  people, 
The  mere  despair  of  surgery. " — Macbeth,  iv.  3.  132. 

i.e.  "the  utter  despair."     So  Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  263. 
The  word  now  means  "  unmixed,"  and  therefore,  by  inference, 


ADJECTIVES.  27 

"nothing  but,"  "bare,"  "insignificant."  But,  in  accordance  with 
its  original  meaning,  "not  merely"  in  Bacon,  is  used  for  "not 
entirely"  So  Hamlet,  i.  2.  137. 

16.  Proper  =  "peculiar,"  "own." 

"  Their  proper  selves." — Temp.  iii.  3.  60. 
"  With  my  proper  hand."—  Cymb.  iv.  2.  97;  T.  N.\.  I.  327. 
i.e.  "  with  my  own  hand,"  as  in  French.     So  ?.  C.  i.  2.  41,  v.  3.  96. 
Very  =  "true."     "  My  -very  friends. "-M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  226. 

17.  More  (mo-re}  and  most  (mo-st)  (comp.  E.  E.  ma  or  mo  ; 
mar  or  mor  ;  maest,  mast,  or  most)  are  frequently  used  as  the  com- 
parative and  superlative  of  the  adjective  "great."     [Moe,  or  mo,  as 
a  comparative  (Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  239  ;   Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  199),  is  con- 
tracted from  more  or  mo-er.     Compare  "bet"  for  "bett-er,"  "leng" 
for  "leng-er,"  and  "streng"  for  "streng-er,"  in  O.  E.      See  also 
"sith,"62.] 

"At  our  more  leisure. " — M.forM.  i.  3.  49. 

"A  more  requital.  "-K.  J.  ii.  I.  34. 

"With  most  gladness." — A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  169. 

"  Our  most  quiet  "  (our  very  great  quiet). — 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  71. 

"  So  grace  and  mercy  at  your  most  need  help  you." 

Hamlet,  i.  5.  180. 
Hence  we  understand  ; 

"Not  fearing  death  nor  shrinking  for  distress, 
But  always  resolute  in  most  extremes." — I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  38. 

i.e.  not  "in  the  majority  of  extremities,"  as  it  would  mean  with  us, 
but  "in  the  greatest  extremes." 
Hence : 

"  More  (instead  of  greater]  and  less  came  in  with  cap  and  knee." 

1  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  68. 
"  And  more  and  less  do  flock  to  follow  him." 

2  Hen.  IV.  i.  I.  209. 
"Both  more  and  less  have  given  him  the  revolt." 

Macbeth,  v.  4.  12. 

That  "less"  refers  here  to  rank,  and  not  to  number,  is  illustrated  by 
"What  great  ones  do  the  less  will  prattle  of."— T:  N.  i.  2.  33. 

So  Chaucer : 

"  The  grete  giftes  to  the  most  and  lestc."—  C.  T.  2227. 


28  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

18.  One  is  used  for  "above  all,"  or  "alone"  i.e.  "all-one"  in 
Elizabethan  English  with  superlatives. 

"  He  is  one  the  truest  manner'd." — Cymb.  i.  6.  164. 
"  One  the  wisest  prince." — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  49. 
"  Have  I  spake  one  the  least  word." — Ib.  153. 
But  in  Early  English  one  is  thus  used  without  a  superlative  : 
"  He  one  is  to  be  praised." 
' '  I  had  no  brother  but  him  one. " 
"  He  was  king  one." 

(Here  Mr.  Morris  conjectures  that  the  O.  E.  "  ane"  stands  for 
A.-S.  dative  "an-um.") 

So  in  Latin  "justissimus  unus;"  and  in  Greek  n6vos  is  similarly 
used.  So  "alone"  =  "above  all  things." 

"That  must  needs  be  sport  alone." — M.  N.  D.  Hi.  2.  119. 
"  I  am  alone  the  villain  of  the  earth." — A.  and  C.  iv.  6.  30. 

"  So  full  of  shapes  is  fancy 
That  it  alone  is  high  fantastical." — 7\  A7,  i.  I.  15. 

None.    See  53. 

19.  Right  (which  is  now  seldom  used  as  an  adjective,  except 
with  the  definite  article,  as  the  opposite  of  "the  wrong,"  e.g.  "the 
right  way,"  not   "a  right  way"),  was  used  by  Shakespeare,  with 
the  indefinite  article,  to  mean  "real,"  "down-rag^/1." 

"  I  am  a  right  maid  for  my  cowardice." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  302. 
Compared,  and  C.  iv.  12.  28,  "Bright  gipsy."  It  means  "true"  in 
"A  right  description  of  our  sport,  my  lord."— Z.  Z.  Z.  v.  2.  522. 

20.  Self  (J*  =  swa  [so];  -If.  =  Germ,  leib,   "body:"  Wedge- 
wood,  however,   suggests  the  reciprocal  pronoun,  Lat.  se,  Germ. 
sic  A,  and  he  quotes,  "Et  il  ses  cors  ira,"  i.e.    "and  he  him  self 
will  go,"  Old  French,  and  still  retained  in  Creole  patois)  was  still 
used  in  its  old  adjectival  meaning  "  same,"  especially  in  "one  self," 
i.e.  "one  and  the  same,"  and  "that  self."     Compare  the  German 
"selbe." 

"That  self  chain.  "-C.  of  E.  v.  i.  10. 
"That  self  mould.  "—Rich.  II.  i.  2.  23. 
"  One  self  king."—  T.  N.  i.  i.  39. 


ADJECTIVES.  29 

Compare  3  Hen.  VI.  Hi.  I.  11;    A.  and  C.  v.  I.  21 ;   Jlf.  of  V.  \. 
I.  148. 

Hence  we  can  trace  the  use  of  himself,  &c.  The  early  English  did 
not  always  use  "self,"  except  for  emphasis  ;  their  use  was  often  the 
same  as  our  modem  poetic  use  : 

"  They  sat  them  down  upon  the  yellow  sand." — TENNYSON. 
In  order  to  define  the  him,  and  to  identify  it  with  the  previous  he, 
the  word  self  (meaning  "the  same,"  "the  aforesaid")  was  added  : 
"He  bends  \\\mself."     Thyself  and  myself  are  for  thee-self,  me-self. 
"  One  self  king"  may  be  illustrated  by  "  one  same  house." — MON- 
TAIGNE, 228.     We  also  find  the  adjectival  use  of  "self"  retained  in 
"  The  territories  of  Attica  selfe."—  N.  P.  ITS- 
"The  city  selfe  of  Athens."— N.  P.  183. 

"  Itself"  is  generally,  if  not  always,  written  in  the  Folio  "it  selfe." 
There  is  a  difficulty,  however,  in  such  a  phrase  as  "  I  myself  saw 
it."  Why  do  we  not  find  "  I-self,"  "he-self,"  in  such  cases? 
Why,  even  in  A.-S.,  do  we  find  the  rule  that,  when  self  agrees  with 
the  subject  of  the  sentence,  the  pronoun  has  to  be  repeated  in  the 
dative  before  self:  "he  (him)  self  did  it,"  but  when  the  noun  is  in 
an  oblique  case  self  is  declined  like  any  other  adjective,  and  agrees 
with  its  noun  :  "he  hine  seot/nf  band,"  i.e.  "he  bound  himself?" 
The  fact  is,  that  in  the  second  case  "self"  is  an  ordinary  adjective 
used  as  an  adjective:  "he  bound  the  same  or  aforesaid  him." 
But  in  the  former  case  "  himself"  is  often  an  abridgment  of  a  pre- 
positional expression  used  as  an  adverb:  "he  did  it  by  himself," 
"of  himself,"  "for  himself,"  and,  being  a  quasi-adverb,  does  not 
receive  the  adjectival  inflection.*  It  follows  that  "my,"  "thy," 
in  "myself"  and  "thyself,"  are  not  pronominal  adjectives,  but 
represent  inflected  cases  of  the  pronouns.  Thus  "  ourself "  for  "our- 
selves" is  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  A.-S.  usage  in 

"We  will  ourself  in  person  to  this  war," — Rich.  II.  i.  4.  42. 
though  of  course  Shakespeare  only  uses  it  for  "myself"  in  the  mouth 
of  a  dignified  personage.  Similarly  in  Piers  Plowman  (B.  viii.  62) 
we  have  "mynonc"  (  =  "of  me  one,"  i.e.  "  of  me  alone"  [see  One]) 
used  for  "by  myself,"  and  "him  one"  (William  of  Palcrne,  17)  for 
"  by  himself ;"  and  here  "myn"  is  the  genitive  of  "I,  "and  "him" 

*  Myself  seems  used  for  our  "by  myself"  in 

"  I  had  as  lief  been  myself  alone."-   A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  269. 


30  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

the  dative  of  "he,"  and  "one"  is  an  adjective.  This  is  also  illus- 
trated by  the  Scottish  "my  lane,"  i.e.  "my,  or  by  me,  alone." 
Hence,  instead  of  "ourselves"  we  have  in  Wickliffe,  2  Cor.  x.  2, 
"but  we  mesuren  us  in  us  silf  and  comparisownen  us  silf  to  us," 
and,  a  line  above,  " hem  silf  "  for  "  themselves." 

Very  early,  however,  the  notion  became  prevalent  that  the  in- 
flected pronoun  was  a  pronominal  adjective,  and  that  "self"  was  a 
noun.  Hence  we  find  in  Chaucer,  "myself  hath  been  the  whip," 
"and  to  prove  their  selfes"  in  Berners'  Froissart;  and  in  Shake- 
speare, Temp.  i.  2.  132,  "thy  crying  self"  Hence  the  modern 
"ourselves,"  "yourselves." 

The  use  of  "  self"  as  a  noun  is  common  in  Shakespeare:  "Tar- 
quin'sself,"  Coriol.  ii.  2.  98;  "my  woeful  self"  L.  C.  143.  Hence 
the  reading  of  the  Folio  may  be  correct  in  the  first  of  the  follow- 
ing lines  : 

"  Even  so  myself  bewails  good  Gloucester's  case, 
With  sad  unhelpful  tears  and  with  dimni'd  eyes 
Look  after  him/— 2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  i.  217. 

But  the  change  to  the  first  person  is  more  in  accordance  with  Shake- 
speare's-usage,  as: 

"  This  love  of  theirs  myself  have  often  seen." 

T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  i.  23. 
So  T.  G.  iii.  i.  147;  ib.  iv.  2.  110. 
So  "himself"  is  used  as  a  pronoun,  without  "he,"  in 

"Direct  not  him  whose  way  himself  \i^\  choose." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  29. 

"Sf//-born  arms"  (Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  80)  seems  to  mean  "divided 
against  themselves,"  "civil  war." 

21.  Some,  being  frequently  used  with  numeral  adjectives  quali- 
fying nouns  of  time,  as  "some  sixteen  months"  (T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  I. 
21),  is  also  found,  by  association,  with  a  singular  noun  of  time. 

"  Some  hour  before  you  took  me."—  T.  N.  ii.  I.  22. 

"  I  would  detain  you  here  some  month  or  two."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  9. 

"  Someday  or  two." — R.  III.  iii.  i.  64. 

It  would  seem  that  in  such  expressions  "some"  has  acquired  an 
adverbial  usage,  as  in  the  provincialisms,  "  It  is  some  late,"  "Five 
mile  or  some"  (MATZNER,  ii.  253).  Compare 

"I  think  'tis  now  some  seven  o'clock." — T.  of  Sh.  iv.  3.  189. 


ADJECTIVES.  31 

"Sum"  is,  however,  found  in  Early  English  and  Anglo-Saxon  in 
the  sense  of  "a  certain."  Compare  A.-S.  "Sum  jungling  hym 
fyligde,"  Mark  xiv.  51.  So  Wickliffe,  where  A.  V.  has  "  A  certain 
young  man  followed  him."  "  Other-some"  {M.N.D.  i.  I.  226),  see 
p.  6. 

22.  The  licence  of  converting  one  part  of  speech  into  another 
may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  words  used  as  adjectives  : 
"The  fine  point  of  seldom  (rare)  pleasure." — Sonn.  52. 
"Each  under  (inferior)  eye." — Sonn.  7. 
"This  beneath  (lower)  world."—/:  of  A.  i.  i.  44. 

"The  orb  below 

As  hush  (silent)  as  death."— Hamlet,  ii.  2.  508. 
See  also  still,  below  (22). 

"  Mostyi'//  (palpable)  and  open  this." — B.  J.  Sejan.  i.  2. 
"  Most  laid  (plotted)  impudence." — B.  J.  Fox. 
As  still  with  us,  any  noun  could  be  prefixed  to  another  with  the 
force  of  an  adjective  :  "  wafer-drops,"  "w*z/<?r-thieves,"  "  -water-fty, " 
&c. 

This  licence,  however,  was  sometimes  used  where  we  should 
prefer  the  genitive  or  an  adjective.  Thus,  "  the  region  kites " 
(Hamlet,  ii.  2.  607,)  for  "the  kites  of  the  region  ;"  and  "the  region 
cloud,"  Sonn.  33.  So  perhaps,  "  a  moment  leisure,"  Hamlet,  \.  3. 
133.  We  say  "heart's  ease,"  but  Shakespeare,  Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  27, 
says  " /ieart-grief ;"  "  6eart-})\ood,"  Rich.  II.  i.  I.  172,  &c. ;  "fac- 
//t>#-traitors,"  ib.  ii.  2.  57.  Again,  a  word  like  "  music"  is  not 
commonly  used  by  us  as  a  prefix  unless  the  suffix  is  habitually 
connected  with  "music  :"  thus  "music-book,"  "  music-master,"  &c., 
but  not  "music  "  for  "musical  "  as  in 

"The honey  of  his  music  vows." — Hamlet,  iii.  I.  164. 
Compare  "venom mud"  J?.  of  L.  561  ;  "venom  clamours,"  C.  of 
E.  v.  i.  69,  for  "venomous  ;"    "venom  sound,"  Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  19  ; 
"venom  tooth,"  Rich.  III.  i.  3.  291. 
This  licence  is  very  frequent  with  proper  names. 
"Here  in  Philippi  fields."— y.  C.  v.  5.  19. 
"Draw  them  to  Tiber  banks." — J.  C.  i.  I.  63. 
"  There  is  no  world  without  Verona  walls." — R.  and  J.  iii.  3.  17, 
"  Within  rich  Pisa  walls." — T.  of  Sh.  ii.  i.  369. 
"To  the  Cyprus  wars."—  O.  i.  i.  151. 
"  Turkey  cushions."—/:  of  Sh.  ii.  i.  355,  as  we  still  say. 


32  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  From  Leonati  seat."—  Cymb.  v.  4.  60. 

"  Venice  gold."—  T.  of  Sh.  ii.  I.  366. 

The  reason  for  this  licence  is  to  be  found  in  an  increasing 
dislike  and  disuse  of  the  inflection  in  's.  Thus  we  find,  "sake" 
frequently  preceded  in  I  Hen.  IP.  by  an  uninflected  noun:  "for 
recreation  sake,"  i  Hen.  IV.  i.  2. 174;  ib.  ii.  I.  80;  ib.  v.  I.  65;  "for 
fashion  sake,"  A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  271. 


ADVERBS. 

23.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  unsettled  nature  of  the  Elizabethan 
language  that,  while  (see  i)  adjectives  were  freely  used  as  adverbs 
without  the  termination  ly,  on  the  other  hand  ly  was  occasionally 
added  to  words  from  which  we  have  rejected  it.     Thus  :  "fastly  " 
(L.  C.  9)  ;   "youngly"  (Coriol.  ii.  3.  244). 

24.  Adverbs  with  prefix  a-:  (i)  Before  nouns.  In  these  adverbs 
the  a-  represents  some  preposition,  as  "in,"  "on,"  "of,"  &c.  con- 
tracted by  rapidity  of  pronunciation.     As  might  be  expected,  the 
contraction  is  mostly  found  in  the  prepositional  phrases  that  are  in 
most  common  use,  and  therefore  most  likely  to  be  rapidly  pro- 
nounced.    Thus  {Coriol.  iii.   I.  261-2)  Menenius  says:    "I  would 
they  were  in  Tiber"  while  the  Patrician,  "I  would  they  were  a-bed." 
Here  a-  means  "  in,"  as  in  the  following  : 

"3</  Fisherman.  Master,  I  marvel  how  the  fishes  live  in  the  sea. 
1st  Fisherman.  Why,  as  men  do  a-land." — P.  of  T.  ii.  I.  31. 

A-  is  also  used  where  we  should  now  use  "  at."  Compare,  how- 
ever, O.  E.  "on  work." 

"  Sets  him  new  a-worb" — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  51  ;  Lear  iii.  5.  8. 

So  R.  of  L.  1496.     And  compare  Hamlet,  ii.   i.  58,  "There  (he) 
was  a'  gaming,"  with 

"  When  he  is  drunk,  asleep,  or  in  his  rage 
^/gaming."— Hamlet,  iii.  3.  91. 

Sometimes  "of"  and  "a-"  are  interchanged.  Compare  "rt-kinv 
and  "of  kind,"  "of  Jmrst"  and  "a-thirst,"  "of  buve  "  and  "a- 
bove."  Most  frequently,  however,  "a-"  represents  our  modern  "on  " 
or  "in."  Compare  "a-live"  and  "on  live." 


ADVERBS.  33 

"liite  the  holy  cords  a-twain." — Lear,  ii.  2.  80  ;  L.  C.  6. 

Compare  "That  his  spere  brast  a- five" i.e.  "burst  in  five  pieces." 
(HALLIWELL.)  So 

"A-front."—\Hen.  IV.  ii.4. 222.     "A-fire."—Temp.  L  2. 212. 
"  Look  up  a-height"  (perhaps). — Lear,  iv.  6.  58. 
"  Beaten  the  maids  a-row." — C.  of  E.  v.  i.  170. 
"  And  keep  in  a-door." — Lear,  i.  4.  188. 

Thus,  probably,  we  must  explain 

"  Thy  angel  becomes  a  fear" — A.  and  C.  ii.  3.  22. 

i.e.  "  a-fear."  The  word  "  a-fere"  is  found  in  A.-S.  in  the  sense 
of  "  fearful  "  (Matzner,  i.  394).  And  in  the  expressions  "Whattf 
plague?"  (i  Hen.  IV.  iv.  2.  56,)  "What  a  devil?"  (i  Hen.  IV. 
ii.  2.  30,)  "A  God's  name"  (Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  251,)  and  the  like,  we 
must  suppose  a  to  mean  "in,"  "on,"  or  "of."  There  is  some 
difficulty  in 

"  I  love  a  ballad  in  print  a  life"  (so  Folio,  Globe,  "o'  life"). 

IV.  T.  iv.  4.  264. 

It  might  be  considered  as  a  kind  of  oath,  "on  my  life."  Nares 
explains  it  "as  my  life,"  but  the  passages  which  he  quotes  could  be 
equally  well  explained  on  the  supposition  that  a  is  a  preposition. 
The  expression  "all  amort"  in  I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  124,  and  71  of  Sh. 
iv.  3.  36,  is  said  to  be  an  English  corruption  of  "a  la  mort." 
"To  heal  the  sick,  to  cheer  the  alamort."— N.\RES. 

The  a  (E.  E.  an  or  on)  in  these  adverbial  words  sometimes  for 
cuph'ony  retains  the  n  : 

"  And  each  particular  hair  to  stand  an  end." — Ham.  i.  4.  19.* 
So  Hamlet,  iii.  4.  122,  Rich.  III.  i.  3.  304;  and  compare  "an 
hungry,"  "  an  hungered"  below,  where  the  an  is  shown  not  to  be 
the  article.  So 

"  A  slave  that  still  an  end  turns  me  to  shame," — 7!  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  67. 
where  "  an  end  "  (like  "  run  on  head"  (Homilies),  i.e.  "  run  a-head  ") 
signifies  motion  "on  to  the  end." 

These  adverbial  forms  were  extremely  common  in  earlier  English, 
even  where  the  nouns  were  of  French  origin.  Thus  we  find  :  "a- 
grief,"  "a-fyn"  for  "en-fin,"  "0-bone"  excellently,  "a-cas"  by 
chance.  Indeed  the  corruption  of  en-  into  a-  in  Old  French  itself 

*  Compare  "  Shall  stand  a  tip-toe." — Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  42. 
D 


34  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

is  very  common,  and  we  still  retain  from  this  source  "a-round  "  for 
••  en  rond  "  and  "  rt-front  "  for  "  en  front." 

(2)  Before  adjectives  and  participles,  used  as  nouns. 

When  an  adjective  may  easily  be  used  as  a  noun,  it  is  intelligible 
that  it  may  be  preceded  by  a-.  Compare  "0-height,"  quoted  above, 
with  our  modern  "on  high,"  and  with 

' '  One  heaved  a-high  to  be  hurled  down  below." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  86. 

It  is  easy  also  to  understand  a- before  verbal  nouns  and  before  adjec- 
tives used  as  nouns,  where  it  represents  on  : 

"I  would  have  him  nine  years  a-killing." — 0.  iv.  I.  188. 
i.e.  "on,  or  in  the  act  of  killing."     So 

"  Whither  were  you  a-going?" — Hen.  VIII.  i.  3.  50. 
i.e.  "in  the  act  of  going." 

"  The  slave  that  was  a-hanging  there." — Lear,  v.  3.  274. 

"  Tom's  a-cold." — Lear,  iii.  4.  59. 
i. A  "a-kale,"  E.  E.  "in  a  chill." 

Some  remarkable  instances  of  this  form  are  subjoined,  in  which 
nouns  are  probably  concealed. 

"  I  made  her  weep  a-good."—T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  170. 
i.e.   "in  good  earnest;"  but  "good"  may  be  a  noun.     Compare 
"a-bone"  above. 

"  The  secret  mischiefs  that  I  set  abroach." — R.  III.  i.  3. 

R.  andj.  i.  I, 

where  a  is  prefixed  to  "broach,"  now  used  only  as  a  verb, 
broach"  and  "abroach"  are  found  in  E.  E.     Compare 

"  O'er  which  his  melancholy  sits  on  brood." 

Hamlet,  iii.  I.  17& 

Compare  "That  sets  them  all  agape"— MILTON,  P.  L.  v.  ; 
which  is  to  be  explained  by  the  existence  of  an  old  noun,  "  gape." 

(3)  As  the  prefix  of  participles  and  adjectives. 

In  this  case  a-  represents  a  corruption  of  the  A.  -S.  intensive  of. 
Thus  from  E.  E.  "<7/Teren,"  we  have  "cfered"  or  "afeared;" 
from  A.-S.  "<?/"-gan,"  "c-gone."  The  <?/"  before  a  vowel  or  h  is 
sometimes  changed  into  on  or  an.  See  On,  182.  And  indeed  the 
prefixes  an-,  on-,  of-,  a-,  were  all  nearly  convertible.  Hence  "  of- 
hungred"  appears  not  only  as  "afingred,"but  also  " 0«-hungered, " 
as  in  St.  Matthew  xxv.  44,  A.  V. :  "  When  saw  we  thee  an  hungered 


ADVEKJ3S.  35 

or  <zthirst  ?"  It  would  be  a  natural  mistake  to  treat  an  here  as  the 
article  :  but  compare 

"  They  were  an  hungry," — Corwl.  i.  I.  209. 

where  the  plural  "they"  renders  it  impossible  to  suppose  that  an  is 
the  article. 

Perhaps,  by  analogy,  a-  is  also  sometimes  placed  before  adjectives 
that  are  formed  from  verbs.  It  can  scarcely  be  said  that  weary  is 
a  noun  in 

"  For  Cassius  is  a-weary  of  the  world." 

J.  C.  iv.  3.  95 ;   I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  88. 

Rather  "rt-weary,"  like  "^walked,"  means  "0/"-wery,"  i.t. 
"  tired  out." 

•25.  Adverbs  ending  in"s"  formed  from  the  possessive 

inflection  of  Nouns.  Some  adverbs  thus  formed  are  still  in 
common  use,  such  as  "needs"  =  "of  necessity." 

"Needs  must  I  like  it  well. "— Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  4. 

"  There  must  be  needs  a  like  proportion." — M.  uf  V.  iii.  4.  14. 
I>ut  we  find  also  in  Shakespeare : 

"  He  would  have  tickled  you  other  gales  than  he  did." 

T.  N.  v.  i.  198. 
i.e.  "in  another  gate  or  fashion." 

In  this  way  (compare  "sideways,"  "lengthways,"  &c. )  we  must 
probably  explain 

"  Come  a  little  nearer  this  ivays"—M.   W.  of  IV.  ii.  2.  50. 
And     "Come  thy  ways."—  T.  AT.  v.  2.  1. 

Compare  also  the  expression  in  our  Prayer-book  : 

"  Any  ways  afflicted,  or  distressed." 
Others  explain  this  as  a  corruption  of  "  wise." 
"Days"  is  similarly  used  : 

"'Tis  but  early  days."—Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  5.  12. 
i.e.   "in  the  day,"  as   the    Germans    use  "morgens."      Compare 
"  now-a-days,"  and  N.  P.  179,  "  at  noondaies." 
A  similar  explanation  might  suggest  itself  for 

"  Is  \Varwick friends  with  Margaret?" 

3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  115  ;  A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  44. 

But  "I  am  friends"  is  not  found  in  E.  E.,  and  therefore  pro- 
bably it  is  simply  a  confusion  of  two  constructions,  "  I  am  friend  to 
him"  and  "  we  are  friends." 

D  2 


36  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

26.  After  was  used  adverbially  of  time: 

"  If  you  know 

That  I  do  fawn  on  men,  and  hug  them  hard, 
And  after  scandal  them. " — J.  C.  i.  2.  76. 

Now  we  use  afterwards  in  this  sense,  using  after  rarely  as  an  adverb 
and  only  with  verbs  of  motion,  to  signify  an  interval  of  space,  as  "  he 
followed  after." 

27.  The  use  of  the  following  adverbs  should  be  noted  : 

Again  (radical  meaning  "  opposite ")  is  now  only  used  in  the 
local  sense  of  returning,  as  in  "  He  came  back  again,  home  again,'' 
&c. ;  and  metaphorically  only  in  the  sense  of  repeating,  as  in  "Again 
we  find  many  other  instances,"  &c.  It  is  used  by  Shakespeare 
metaphorically  in  the  sense  of  "on  the  other  hand."  Thus — 

"  Have  you 

Ere  now  denied  the  asker,  and  now  again  (on  the  other  hand) 
Of  him  that  did  not  ask  but  mock,  bestow 
Your  sued-for  tongues  ?" — Coriol.  ii.  3.  214. 
"Where  (whereas)  Nicias  did  turne  the  Athenians  from  their 
purpose,  Alcibiades  againe(on  the  other  hand)  had  a  further  reach," 
&c.— N.  P.  172.     So  Rich.  II.  ii.  9.  27. 

It  is  also  used  literally  for  "back  again."  "Haste  you  again," 
A.  W.  ii.  2.  73,  does  not  mean  "haste  a  second  time,"  but  "hasten 
back." 

Again  is  used  for  "again  and  again"  i.e.  repeatedly  (a  previous 
action  being  naturally  implied  by  again),  and  hence  intensively 
almost  like  "  amain." 

"  For  wooing  here  until  I  sweat(ed)  again."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  205. v 
"  Weeping  again  the  king  my  father's  wreck." 

Tempest,  \.  2.  390. 
For  omission  of  Win  "  sweat"  (common  in  E.  E.),  see  341. 

28.  All  (altogether)  used  adverbially  : 

"I  will  dispossess  her  a//." — T.  of  A.  i.  i.  139. 

"  For  us  to  levy  power  is  all  unp'ossible. "— Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  126. 
In  compounds  all  is  freely  thus  used,  "^//-worthy  lord  ;"  " all- 
watched  night;"  "her  ^//-disgraced  friend,"  A.  and  C.  iii.  12.  22. 
Sometimes  it  seems  to  mean  "by  all  persons,"  as  in  "a/7-shunned." 
So,  "this  <z//-hating  world,"  Rich.  II.  v.  5.  66,  does  not  mean 
"hating  all,"  but  "hating  (me)  universally." 


ADVERBS.  37 

All  used  intensively  was  frequently  prefixed  to  other  adverbs  of 
degree,  as  "so." 

"  What  occasion  of  import 
Hath  alt  so  long  detain'd  you  from  your  wife  ?" 

T.  ofSh.  iii.  i.  105. 

The  connection  of  all  and  "so"  is  perpetuated  in  the  modem 
"also."     Still  more  commonly  is  all  prefixed  to  "  too." 
"  In  thy  heart-blood,  though  being  all  too  base 
To  stain  the  temper  of  my  knightly  sword. " 

Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  28. 
"Our  argument 
Is  all  too  heavy  to  admit  much  talk." — 2  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  24. 

So  Cymb.  v.  5.  169  ;  T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  I.  162  ;  Sonn.  18,  61,  86  ; 
R.  of  L.  44,  1686. 

There  are  two  passages  in  Shakespeare  where  ail-to  requires 
explanation  : 

"It  was  not  she  that  called  him  all  to  nought."—  V.  and  A.  993. 

"  The  very  principals  (principal  posts  of  the  house)  did  seem  to  rend 
And  all  Stopple."—/',  of  T.  iii.  2.  17. 

(1)  In  the  first  passage  ail-to  is  probably  an  intensive  form  of 
"to,"  which  in  Early  English  (see  TOO,  below)  had  of  itself  an 
intensive  meaning.     Originally  "to  "belonged  to  the  verb.     Thus 
"to-breke"  meant  "break  in  pieces."    When  "all"  was  added,  as 
in    "all  to-breke,"  it  at  first  had  no  connection  with   "to,"  but 
intensified    "to-breke."      But    "to"  and    "too"   are  written  in- 
differently for  one  another  by  Elizabethan  and  earlier  writers,  and 
hence  sprang  a  corrupt   use  of  "ail-to,"  caused  probably  by  the 
frequent  connection  of  all  and  too  illustrated  above.     It  means  here 
"altogether." 

(2)  In  the  second  passage  some  (a)  connect  "to-topple,"  believing 
that  here  and  in  M.  W.  of  W.  iv.  4-57,  "to-pinch,"  "to"  is  an 
intensive  prefix,  as  in  Early  English.    But  neither  of  the  two  passages 
necessitates  the  supposition  that  Shakespeare  used  this  archaism. 

(See^/.  w.  ofw.  iv.  4.  5  below,  To  omitted  and  inserted,  350.) 

We  can,  therefore,  either  (b)  write  "ail-to"  (as  in  the  Globe),  and 
treat  it  as  meaning  "altogether,"  or  (c)  suppose  that  "all"  means 
"quite,"  and  that  "to  topple,"  like  "to  rend,"  depends  upon 
"  seem."  This  last  is  the  more  obvious  and  probable  construction.* 

Or,  adopting  this  constmction,  we  may  take  all  to  mean  "  the  whole  house." 
'    The  principals  did  seem  to  rend,  and  the  whole  house  to  topple." 


38  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

From  this  use  of  "all  too"  or  "all  to,"  closely  connected  in 
the  sense  of  "  altogether,"  it  was  corruptly  employed  as  an  intensive 
prefix,  more  especially  before  verbs  beginning  with  be-:  "  all-to- 
/^•qualify,"  B.  J.;  "  rt#-/0-Mcist,"  ib.\  and  later,  "he  ail-to  be- 
Gullivers  me,"  SWIFT  ;  "a//-to-&'-traytor'd,"  NARES. 

29.  Almost,  used  for  mostly,  generally: 

"Neither  is  it  almost  seen  that  very  beautiful  persons  are  of 

great  virtue." — B.  £.  163. 

Our  modern  meaning  nearly  is  traceable  to  the  fact  that  anything 
is  nearly  done  when  the  most  of  it  is  done. 

Almost  (see  also  Transpositions)  frequently  follows  the  word 
which  it  qualifies. 

"  I  swoon  almost  with  fear."— M.  N.  D.  ii.  3.  154. 
"  As  like  almost  to  Claudio  as  himself.  "—M.for  M.\.  I.  494. 
Hence  in  negative  sentences  we  find   "  not-almost "  where  we 
should  use  "almost  not,"  or,  in  one  word,  "scarcely,"  "hardly." 
"  You  cannot  reason  (almost)  with  a  man." — Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  39. 
The  Globe  omits  the  parenthesis  of  the  Folio. 

"  And  yet  his  trespass,  in  our  common  reason, 
Is  not  almost  a  fault ...  to  incur  a  private  check." — 0.  iii.  3.  66. 

i.t.  "  is  not  (I  may  almost  say)  fault  enough  to,"  &c.  or  "is  scarcely 
fault  enough  to,"  &c.     So 

"I  have  not  breath'd  almost  since  I  did  see  it." — C.  of  E.  v.  I.  181. 

It  was  natural  for  the  Elizabethans  to  dislike  putting  the  qualify- 
ing "almost"  before  the  word  qualified  by  it.  But  there  was  an 
ambiguity  in  their  idiom.  "  Not  almost-a-fault"  would  mean  "  not 
approaching  to  a  fault  ;"  "not-almost  a  fault,"  "  very  nearly  not  a 
fiult."  We  have,  therefore,  done  well  in  avoiding  the  ambiguity 
by  disusing  "almost"  in  negative  sentences.  The  same  ambiguity 
and  peculiarity  attaches  to  interrogative,  comparative,  and  other 
conjunctional  sentences. 

"  Would  you  imagine  or  almost  believe  ?" — Rich.  III.  iii.  5.  35. 
i.e.  "  Would  you  suppose  without  evidence,  or  (I  may  almost  say) 
believe  upon  evidence?"  &c. 

"  Our  aim,  which  was 
To  take  in  many  towns  ere  almost  Rome 
Should  know  we  were  afoot." — Coriol.  i.  2.  24. 


ADVERBS.  39 

Alone,  see  One,  18. 

30.  Along  is  frequently  joined  to  "  with  "  and  transposed,  as: 
"  With  him  is  Gratiano  gone  along." — M.  of  V.  ii.  8.  2. 

Hence  the  "with  me"  being  omitted,   "along"  is  often  used  foi 
"along  with  me." 

"  Demetrius  and  Egeus,  go  along, 
I  must  employ  you  in  some  business." — M.  N.  D.  i.  I.  123. 

Note,  that  here,  as  in  T.  of  Sh.  iv.  5.  7 ;  2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  i.  191  ; 
O.  i.  I.  180;  "go"  is  used  where  we  should  say  "come."  The 
word  is  used  simply  to  express  the  motion  of  walking  by  WICKLIFFE  : 
Acts  xiv.  8.  MONTAIGNE,  Florio,  230. 

Sometimes  the  verb  of  motion  is  omitted,  as  in 

"  Will  you  along  (with  us)?" — Coriol.  ii.  3.  157. 
"  Let's  along"  is  still  a  common  Americanism. 
Sometimes  the  ellipsis  refers  to  the  third  person. 

"  Go  you  along  (with  him)." — A.  and  C.  v.  I.  69. 

Perhaps  we  ought  (to  the  advantage  of  the  rhythm)  to  place  a 
comma  after  along,  in 

"  Therefore  have  I  entreated  him  along, 
With  us  to  watch  the  minutes  of  this  night." — Ham.  i.  I.  26. 

30  a.  Anon.     The  derivative  meaning  of  anon  (an-ane)  is  "at 
one  instant,"  or  "  in  an  instant,"  and  this  is  its  ordinary  use.    But  in 
"Still  and  a«o«."— K.  J.  iv.  i.  47. 
"  Which  ever  and  anon  he  gave  his  nose." 

I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  38. 

anon  seems  to  mean  "  the  moment  after,"  a  previous  moment  being 
implied  by  "still,"  "ever."     Compare  our  "  now  and  then." 

31.  Anything,  like  Any  Ways,  is  adverbially  used  : 

"  Do  you  think  they  can  take  any  pleasure  in  it,  or  be  anything 
delighted?" — MONTAIGNE,  31. 

"  Any  ways  afflicted,  or  distressed." — Prayer-book. 
"Ways"  is,  perhaps,  genitive.     See  25. 

32.  Away. 

"  She  could  never  away  with  me."— 2  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  231. 
i.f.   "she  could  not  endure  me."      A  verb  of  motion  is  probably 


40  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

omitted.  Compare  our  "  I  cannot  get  on  with  him,"  "  put  up  with 
him,"  and  the  provincial  "  I  cannot  do  with  him." 

"  I  could  not  do  withal."—  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  72. 

So  '  '  she  could  never  away  with  me  "  =  '  '  she  could  not  go  on  her 
way,"  i.e.  "get  on  with  me."  For  the  omission  of  the  verb 
of  motion  compare 

"  Will  you  along  \"—Coriol.  ii.  3.  157. 

33.  Back,  for  "backward." 

"  Goes  to  and  back  lackeying  the  varying  tide." 

A.  and  C.  i.  4.  46. 
Where  we  should  say  " 


34.  Besides  =   "by  the  side  of  the  main  question,"  i.e.   "in 
other  respects,"  "  for  the  rest." 

"  This  Timaeus  was  a  man  not  so  well  knowne  as  he,  but  besides 
(for  the  rest)  a  wise  man  and  very  hardy."  —  N.  P.  174. 

Similarly  besides  is  used  as  a  preposition  in  the  sense  "  out  of." 
"  How  fell  you  besides  your  five  wits?"—  T.  N.  iv.  2.  92. 

35.  Briefly  =  "  a  short  time  ago,"  instead  of  (as  with  us)  "  in  a 
short  space  of  time." 

"  Briefly  we  heard  their  drums. 
How  couldst  thou  .  .  .  bring  thy  news  so  late?" 

Coriol.  i.  6.  16. 
Similarly  we  use  the  Saxon  equivalent  "shortly"  to  signify  futurity. 

36.  By  (original  meaning  "  near  the  side."     Hence  "by  and  by" 
"»  "very  near,"  which  can  be  used  either  of  time  or,  as  in  Early 
English,  also  of  place']  is  used  for  "aside,"  "on  one  side,"  "away," 
in  the  phrase 

44  Stand  by,  or  I  shall  gall  you."—  K.  J.  iv.  3.  94. 

Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  "to  stand  by  a  person"  means  "to 
wtand  near  any  one." 

37.  Chance  appears  to  be  used  as  an  adverb  : 

"  How  chance  thou  art  returned  so  soon  ?  "-C.  of  E.  i.  2.  42. 

But  the  order  of  the  words    "thou  art,"   indicates  that  Shake- 

speare treated  chance  as  a  verb.     "How  may  it  chance  or  chance:, 


ADVERBS.  41 

that,"  as  Hamlet,  ii.  2.  343,  "  How  chances  it  they  travel?"  Com- 
pare— 

"  How  chance  the  roses  there  do  fade  so  fast?" 

M.  N.  D.\.  i.  129. 

So  Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  i.  151 ;  2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  4.  20  ;  Rich.  III.  iv.  2. 
103  \  M.  W.  of  W.  v.  5.  231  \P.ofT.  iv.  I.  23. 

Compare,  however,  also — 

"  If  case  some  one  of  you  would  fly  from  us." — 3  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  34. 
where  "  case"  is  for  the  Old  French  "per-case." 

This  use  of  chance  as  an  apparent  adverb  is  illustrated  by 

"  Perchance  his  boast  of  Lucrece'  sovereignty 
Suggested  this  proud  issue  of  a  king  : 
Perchance  that  envy  of  so  rich  a  thing 
Braving  compare,  disdainfully  did  sting." — R.  of  L.  39. 

Here  "  perchance  "  seems  used  first  as  an  adverb,  then  as  a  verb, 
"it  may  chance  that."  So  Shakespeare,  perhaps,  used  chance  as 
an  adverb,  but  unconsciously  retained  the  order  of  words  which 
shows  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  verb. 

38.  Even.  "Even  now"  with  us  is  applied  to  an  action  that 
has  been  going  on  for  some  long  time  and  still  continues,  the 
emphasis  being  laid  on  "now."  In  Shakespeare  the  emphasis  is 
often  to  be  laid  on  "even,"  and  "even  now"  means  " exactly  or 
only  now,"  i.e.  "scarcely  longer  ago  than  the  present:"  hence 
"but  now." 

"  There  was  an  old  fat  woman  even  now  with  me." 

M.  W.  of  W.  iv.  5.  26. 

Often  "but  even  now"  is  used  in  this  sense:  M.ofV.\.  I.  35. 
On  the  other  hand,  both  "even  now"  and  "fo/now"  can  signify 
"just  at  this  moment,"  as  in 

"  But  now  I  was  the  lord 

Of  this  fair  mansion  ; .  .  .  and  even  now,  but  now, 
This  house,  these  servants,  and  this  same  myself 
Are  yours." — M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  171. 

We  use  "just  now"  for  the  Shakespearian  "even  now,"  laying 
the  emphasis  on  "just."  Even  is  used  for  "even  now,"  in  the  sense 
of  "at  this  moment,"  in 

"  A  certain  convocation  of  politic  worms  are  even  at  him." 

Hamlet,  iv.  3.  22. 


42  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So  "even  when"  means  "just  when"  in 

"  (Roses)  die,  even  when  they  to  perfection  grow." 

T.  N,  ii.  4.  42. 
39.  Ever  (at  every  time)  freq.  : 

"  For  slander's  mark  was  ever  yet  the  fair.  "  —  Sonn,  70. 
The  latter  use  is  still  retained  in  poetry.     But  in  prose  we  confine 
"ever"  (like  the  Latin  "  unquam")  to  negative,  comparative,  and 
interrogative  sentences. 

Ever  seems  contrary  to  modern  usage  in 

"Would  I  might 
" 


that  man."—  Temp.  i.  2.  168. 
"But,"  however,  implies  a  kind  of  negative,  and  "ever"  means 
"at  any  time." 

40.  Far,  used  metaphorically  for  "very." 

"Butyar  unfit  to  be  a  sovereign."  —  3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  92. 
So  2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  286. 

41.  Forth,  hence,  and  hither  are  used  without  verbs  of  motion 
(motion  being  implied)  : 

"  I  have  no  mind  of  feastingyfrrtf/fc  to-night.  "  —  M.  of  V.  ii.  2.  37. 

"  Her  husband  will  be  forth"—  M.  W.  of  W.  ii.  2.  278. 

"  By  praising  him  here  who  doth  hence  remain."  —  Sonn.  39. 
"  From  thence  the  sauce  to  meat  is  ceremony."  —  Macb.  iii.  4.  36. 
"  Methinks  I  hear  hither  your  husband's  drum."—  Coriol.  i.  3.  32. 
"  Prepare  thee  hence  for  France.  "  —  Rich.  II.  v.  I.  31. 
Forth,  "  to  the  end  :  " 

"  To  hear  this  matter  forth."—  M.  for  M.  v.  I.  255. 
Forth,  as  a  preposition  :  see  Prepositions. 

42.  Happily,  which  now  means  "by^y^hap,"  was  sometimes 
used  for  "  haply,"  i.e.  "by  hap,"  just  as  "  success  "  was  sometimes 
"  good,"  at  other  times  "  ill." 

"  Hamlet.  That  great  baby  you  see  there  is  not  yet  out  of  his 
swaddling-  clouts. 

Ros.  Happily  he's  the  second  time  come  to  them."—tfamlef,  ii. 
2.  402. 

"  And  these  our  ships,  you  happily  may  think, 
Are  like  the  Trojan  horse  (which)  was  stuffed  within 
'Vith  bloody  veins."—/',  of  T.  i.  4.  29. 


ADVERBS.  43 

"  Though  I  may/wr 
Her  will  recoiling  to  her  better  judgment 
May  fall  to  match  you  with  her  country  forms, 
And  happily  repent."—  Othello,  iii.  3.  238. 
It  means  "gladly"  in  Macbeth,  i.  3.  89. 

43.  Here  is  used  very   freely  in  compounds:   "they  here  ap- 
proach" (Macb.  iv.  3.  133);  "  /kr<r-remain "   (ib.    148).      Perhaps 
here  may  be  considered  as  much  an  adjective,  when  thus  used,  as 
"  then  "  in  "  our  then  dictator  "  (Coriol.  ii.  2.  93).     So  in  Greek. 

44.  Hitherto,  which  is  now  used  of  time,   is  used  by  Shake- 
speare of  space : 

"  England  from  Trent  and  Severn  hitherto.'1 

i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  74. 

45.  Home.     We  still  say  "to  come  home,"  "to  strike  home" 
using  the  word  adverbially  with  verbs  of  motion,  but  not 

"  I  cannot  speak  him  home,'11  i.e.  completely. 

Coriol.  ii.  2.  107. 

"  Satisfy  me  home. " — Cymb.  iii.  5.  83. 
"  (Your  son)  lack'd  the  sense  to  know  her  estimation  home" 

A.  W.  v.  3.  4. 
"  That  trusted  home 
Might  yet  enkindle  you  unto  the  crown." — Macbeth,  i.  3.  121. 

46.  HOW  (adverbial  derivative  from  hwa  =  hwu,  O.  E.)  used  for 
"however:" 

"  I  never  yet  saw  man 

How  wise,  hmv  noble,  young,  how  rarely  featured, 
But  she  would  spell  him  backward." — M.  Ado,  iii.  I.  60. 
"  Or  whether  his  fall  enraged  him  or  how  'twas." 

Coriol.  i.  3.  69. 
HOW  is  perhaps  used  for  "  as  "  in  V.  and  A.  815  : 

"  Look,  how  a  bright  star  shooteth  from  the  sky, 
So  glides  he  in  the  night  from  Venus'  eye." 

This,  which  is  the  punctuation  of  the  Globe,  is  perhaps  correct, 
and  illustrated  by 

"  Look,  as  the  fair  and  fiery -pointed  sun 
Rushing  from  forth  a  cloud  bereaves  our  sight, 
Even  so,"  &.C.—R.  of  L.  372. 
So  V.  and  A.  67  ;  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  127. 
Similarly,  GASCOIGNE  (Matzner)  has  : 

" How  many  men,  so  many  minds." 


44  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

47.  HoWSOe'er  for  "  howsoever  it  be,"  "  in  any  case." 

"  Howsoever,  my  brother  hath  done  well." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  146. 

So  However.    See  403. 

•% 

48.  Last.    Such  phrases  as   "at  the  last,"  "at  the  first,"  are 
common,  but  not 

"  The  last  (time)  that  e'er  I  took  her  leave  at  court." 

A.  W.  v.  3.  79. 

Merely,  completely.    See  Adjectives,  Mere,  15- 
More,  Most.    See  Adjectives,  18. 

49.  MoreabOVC  =  "moreover." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  126. 

50.  Moreover  precedes  "  that,"  like  our  "beside  that." 
"  Moreover  that  we  much  did  long  to  see  you." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  2. 

51.  Much,  More,  is  frequently  used  as  an  ordinary  adjective, 
after  a  pronominal  adjective,  like  the  Scotch  mickle,  and  the  E.  E. 
muchcl*    (So  in  A. -S.) 

"  Thy  much  goodness."— J/.  for  M.  v.  I.  534. 

''  Yet  so  much  (great)  is  my  poverty  of  spirit." 

Rich.  III.  ill  7.  159. 
Much  was  frequently  used  as  an  adverb  even  with  positive  adjectives. 

"I  am  much  ill." — 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  4.  111. 
So  Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  115 ;  ?.  C.  iv.  3.  255. 

"  Our  too  much  memorable  shame." — Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  53. 
So  Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  1. 

More  is  frequently  used  as  a  noun  and  adverb  in  juxtaposition. 
"  The  slave's  report  is  seconded  and  more 

More  fearful  is  deliver'd."— CVrw/.  iv.  6.  63.  Comp.  K.  J.  iv.  2.  42. 
"  More  than  that  tongue  that  moreliath  more  express' d." — Sonn.  23. 
"If  there  be  more,  more  woeful,  hold  it  in."— Lear,  v.  3.  202. 

We  sometimes  say  "the  many"  (see  12),  but  not  "  the  most,"  in 
the  sense  of  "  most  men."     Hey  wood,  however,  writes— 
"  Yes,  since  the  most  censures,  believes  and  saith 
By  an  implicit  faith."— Commendatory  Verses  on  B.  J. 

•  Compare  "A  noble  peer  ot  mickle  trust  and  power."— MILTON,  Comus. 


ADVERBS.  45 

Needs.    See  25. 

52.  Never  is  used  where  we  now  more  commonly  use  "ever" 
in  phrases  as  : 

"  And  creep  time  ne'er  so  slow, 
Yet  it  shall  come  for  me  to  do  thee  good." — K.  J.  iii.  3.  31. 

So  i  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  98  ;  Rich.  II.  v.  I.  64. 

There  is  probably  here  a  confusion  of  two  constructions,  (i) 
"And  though  time  creep  so  slow  as  it  never  crept  before,"  and  (2) 
"And  though  time  never  crept  so  slow  as  in  the  case  I  am  sup- 
posing." These  two  are  combined  into,  "And  though  time  creep — 
(how  shall  I  describe  it  ?  though  it  crept)  never  so  slow."  Con- 
struction (2)  is  illustrated  by 

"  Never  so  weary,  never  so  in  woe, 
I  can  no  further  crawl,  no  further  go." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  442. 

Here,  strictly  speaking,  the  ellipsis  is  "/  have  been"  or  "having 
been  ;"  "I  have  never  been  so  weary."  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that 
"  never  so  weary"  being  habitually  used  in  this  sense,  Hermia  might 
say,  "I  am  never-so-weary,"  or  still  more  easily,  "though  I  were 
never-so-wcary." 

In  such  phrases  as  "never  the  nearer,"  never  seems  to  mean 
"nought."  So  Wickliffe,  John  xix.  21  : 

"  But  how  he  now  seeth  we  wite  nere"  i.e.  "  we  know  not." 

53.  None  seems  to  be  the  emphatic  form  of  "no,"  like  "mine" 
of  "  my"  in  the  modern  idiom  : 

"  Satisfaction  (there)  can  be  none  but  by  pangs  of  death." 

•  T.  N.  iii.  4.  261. 

For  we  could  not  say  "there  can  be  none  satisfaction."  This 
emphatic  use  of  the  pronoun  at  the  end  of  a  sentence  is  found  very 
early.  None  seems  loosely  used  for  "not  at  all,"  like  "nothing" 
(55)>  "no-whit,"  i.e.  "not."  And  this  may,  perhaps,  explain  : 

"  None  a  stranger  there 
So  merry  and  so  gamesome." — Cymb.  i.  6.  59. 

Here  either  none  means  "not,"  "ne'er,"  or  a  comma  must  be 
placed  after  none:  "none,  being  a  stranger,"  which  is  a  very  harsh 
construction. 

The  adverbial  use  of  "  none  "  may  be  traced  to  Early  English  and 
Anglo-Saxon.  Under  the  form  "nan,"  i.e.  "  ne-an "  (compare 


4b  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

German  "nein"),  we  find  "nan  more,"  and  also  "  none  longer, " 
"  whether  he  wolde  or  noon"  (CHAUCER,  Matzner).  "  Nan  "  was 
used  as  an  adverbial  accusative  for  "by  no  means"  even  in  A.-S. 
(Matzner,  iii.  131.)  In  Rich.  II.  v.  2.  99,  "He  shall  be  none,"  the 
meaning  is,  "he  shall  not  be  one  of  their  number. "  "None"  is 
still  used  by  us  for  "nothing,"  followed  by  a  partitive  genitive, 
"  I  had  none  of  it ;"  and  this  explains  the  Elizabethan  phrase 

"She  will  none  of  me."—/:  N.  i.  3.  113. 

i.e.  "  She  desires  to  have  (321)  nothing  from,  as  regards  to  do  with, 
me."  So 

"You  can  say  none  of  this."—  T.  N.  v.  I.  342. 

54.  Not  is  apparently  put  for  "not  only"  in  the  two  following 
passages  : 

"  Speak  fair  ;  you  may  salve  so 
Not  what  is  dangerous  present,  but  the  loss 
Of  what  is  past." — Coriol.  iii.  2.  71. 

"  For  that  he  has 

Given  hostile  strokes,  and  that  not  in  the  presence 
Of  dreaded  justice,  but  on  the  ministers 
That  do  distribute  it." — Coriol.  iii.  3.  97. 

55.  Nothing,  like  "no-way,"  "naught,"  "not,"  (A.-S.  naht, 
i.e.  "no  whit,")  is  often  used  adverbially. 

"  And  that  would  set  my  teeth  not/ring  on  edge." 

I  Hen.  If.  iii.  i.  133. 
"  I  fear  nothing  what  may  be  said  against  me." 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  212. 
where  "what     is  not  put  for  "which." 

56.  Off  (away  from  the  point)  : 

"  That's  off:  that's  off.     I  would  you  had  rather  been  silent." 

Coriol.  ii.  2.  (J4. 
To  be  off=  to  take  off  one's  hat : 

"  I  will  practise  the  insinuating  nod  and  be  off  to  them  most 
counterfeitly."—  Coriol.  ii.  3.  107.* 

57.  Once  ("  once  for  all,"  "  above  all  ")  : 

"  Once,  if  he  require  our  voices,  we  ought  not  to  deny  him." 

Coriol.  ii.  3.  1. 
"  Stands  off"  is  used  for  "stands  out,  i.e.  in  relief."— Hen.  V.  ii.  *.  103. 


ADVERBS.  47 

"  Tis  once  thou  lovest, 
And  I  will  fit  thee  with  the  remedy." — M.  Ado,  i.  I.  320. 

Hence  "positively." 

1 '  Nay,  an  you  be  a  cursing  hypocrite,  once  you  must  be  looked 
to."— J/.  Ado,  v.  i.  212. 

"Nay,  an  you  begin  to  rail  on  society,  once  I  am  sworn  not  to 
give  regard  to  you." — Timon,  i.  2.   251. 

The  Folio  and  Globe  place  the  comma  after  once 
Once  is  sometimes  omitted  : 

"This  is  (once)  for  all." — Hamlet,  i.  3.  131. 
Once  sometimes  "in  a  word:" 

"  Once  this — your  long  experience  of  her  wisdom, 
Her  sober  virtue,  years,  and  modesty, 
Plead  on  her  part  some  cause  to  you  unknown." 

C.  ofE.  iii.  i.  90. 
At  Once  is  found  in  this  or  a  similar  sense  : 

"My  lords,  at  once ;  the  cause  why  we  are  met 

Is  to  determine  of  the  coronation." — Rich.  III.  iii.  4.  1. 
' '  My  lords,  at  once ;  the  care  you  have  of  us 
Is  worthy  praise." — 2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  66. 

Once  seems  to  mean  "  at  some  time  (future)"  in 

"  I  thank  thee,  and  I  pray  thee,  once  to-night 

Give  my  sweet  Nan  this  ring." — M.  W.  of  W.  iii.  4.  103. 

But  the  word  may  be  taken  as  above. 

58.  Only,  i-e.  on(e]ly,  is  used  as  an  adjective.     See  But  (130), 

and  Transpositions  (420). 

"The  only  (mere)  breath."— SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  7.  13. 
"  It  was  for  her  love  and  only  pleasure." — IINGELEND. 
"  By  her  only  aspect  she  turned  men  into  stones."— BACON, 
Adv.  of  L.  274. 

We  have  lost  this  adjectival  use  of  only,  except  in  the  sense  of 
"single,"  in  such  phrases  as  "  an  only  child." 

Only,  like  "alone"  (18),  is  used  nearly  in  the  sense  of  "  above 
all,"  "surpassing." 

'  Oph.    You  are  merry,  my  lord. 
Ham.  Who  ?     I  ? 
Oph.    Ay,  my  lord. 

Ham.  O  God,  your  enly  jig-maker." — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  131. 
"Your  worm  is  your  only  emperor  for  diet." — Ib.  iv.  3.  22. 


48  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR 

58  a.  Over  means  "over  again"  in 

"Trebles  ihee  o'er."— Tempest,  ii.  I.  221. 
i.e.  "repeats  thy  former  self  thrice."     Compare 

"I  would  be  trebled  twenty  times  myself." — M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  154. 

59.  Presently  =  "at  the  present  time,"  "at  once,"  instead  of, 
as  now,  "  soon,  but  not  at  once." 

"  Desd.     Yes,  but  not  yet  to  die. 

Othello.  O  yo.s,  presently."— Othello,  v.  2.  52. 

So  Rich.  II.  iii.  t.  3  ;  2.  179. 

60.  Round,  used  adverbially  in  the  sense  of  "  straightforwardly." 
"Round,"  like  "square"  with  us,  from  its  connection  with  "regular," 
"symmetrical,"  and  "complete,"  was  used  to  signify  "plain  and 
honest."     Hence 

"I  went  round 'to  work." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  139. 
means  just  the  opposite  of  "  circuitously. " 

61.  Severally  ("sever,"  Lat.  separo),  used   for    "separately." 
So 

"  When  severally  we  hear  them  rendered." — y.  C.  iii.  2.  10. 
And    "  Contemplation    doth    withdraw    our    soule  from  us,    and 
severally  employ  it  from  the  body."— MONTAIGNE,  30. 

Thus,  "a  several  plot"  (Sonn.   137)  is  a  "separate"  or  "private 
plot"  opposed  to  "a  common." 

62.  Since  (A.-S.  sith  =   "time,"  also  adv.*  "late,"  "later;" 
" sith-than"  ==  "after  that")  adverbially  for  "ago." 

"I  told  your  lordship  a  year  since." — M.  Ado,  ii.  2.  13. 
This  must  be  explained  by  an  ellipsis  : 

"  I  told  your  lordship  (it  is)  a  year  since  (I  told  you)." 
Compare  a  transitional  use  of  "since"  between  an  adverb  and 
conjunction  in  "  Waverley  ;  or,  'tis  Sixty  Years  since. "  Omit  "'tis," 
and  since  becomes  an  adverb. 

So  since  is  used  for  "  since  then,"  like  our  "  ever  since"  in 

1  And  since,  methinks,  I  would  not  (do  not  wish  to)  grow  so 
fast."— Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  14. 

Since,  when  used  adverbially  as  well   as  conjunctionally,    fre- 
*  Sith  for  sither,  like  "  mo  "  for  "  mo-er."    (See  17. ) 


ADVERItx.  49 

qucntly  takes  the  verb  in  the  simple  past  where  we  use  the 
complete  present : 

"  I  did  not  see  him  since." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  1. 

This  is  in  accordance  with  an  original  meaning  of  the  word,  "later," 
("sith.")  We  should  still  say,  "I  never  saw  him  after  that;" 
and  since  has  the  meaning  of  "  after." 

We  also  find  the  present  after  "since,"  to  denote  an  action  that 
is  and  has  been  going  on  since  a  certain  time.  (So  in  Latin  with 
"  jampridem.") 

"  My  desires  e'er  since  pursue  me." — 71  N.  i.  I.  23. 

See  Conjunctions,  132- 

63.  So  (original  meaning  "in  that  way")  is  frequently  inserted 
in  replies  where  we  should  omit  it : 

"  Trib.  Repair  to  the  Capitol. 

Peop.   We  will  so." — Coriol.  ii.  3.  262. 
"  71  Fortitude  doth  consist,  &c. 

D.  It  doth  so  indeed,  sir."— B.  J.  Si!.  Wont.  iv.  2. 

Here  so  means  "as  you  direct,  assert."  "As"  is,  by  derivation, 
only  an  emphatic  form  of  so.  See  106. 

64.  So  is  sometimes  omitted  after  "  I  think,"  "if,"  &c. 

"6*.  What,  in  metre? 
Luc.   In  any  proportion  or  language. 
G.  I  think,  or  in  any  religion."  -M.  for  M.  i.  2.  24. 
"  Will  the  time  serve  to  tell  ?    I  do  not  think  (so)." 

Coriol.  i.  6.  46. 
"  Haply  you  shall  not  see  me  more  ;  or  if, 

A  mangled  shadow." — A.  and  C.  iv.  2.  27. 
"  Xot  like  a  corse  ;  or  if,  not  to  be  buried." — IV.  T.  iv.  4.  131. 
"Do  not  plunge  thyself  too  far  in  anger,  lest  thou  hasten  thy 
trial,  which  if,  Lord  have  mercy  on  thee  for  a  hen." — A.   W.  ii. 
3.  223. 

Compare 

"  What  though  ;  yet  I  live  like  a  poor  gentleman  born." 

M.  W.  of  W.  i.  i.  287  ;  Hen.  V.  ii.  i.  9  ;  A.  Y.  L.  iii.  3.  51. 

"O,  if  it  prove, 
Tempests  are  kind  and  salt  waves  fresh  in  love." 

T.  N.  iii.  4.  418. 
E 


50  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

65.  So  is  put  for  the  more  emphatic  form,  a.\-so. 
"Demetrius,  thou  dost  over- ween  in  all, 

And  so  in  this,  to  bear  me  down  with  braves. " 

T.  A.  ii.  r.  30. 
"  It  is  a  cold  and  heat  that  does  outgo 

All  sense  of  winters  and  of  summers  so." — B.  J.  SadSh.  ii.  I. 
"  Mad  in  pursuit,  and  in  possession  so." — Sonn.  129. 
' '  Good  morrow,  Antony. 

Ant.  So  to  most  noble  Caesar."— J.  C.  ii.  2.  117. 

So  approaches  "  also"  in 

"  Cousin,  farewell  :  and,  uncle,  bid  him  so." 

Rick.  II.  i.  3.  247. 

So  that;  so  as.    (See  Pronouns,  Relative,  275,  276.) 

66.  So  (like  the  Greek  OUTOJ  Sif)  is  often  used  where  we  should 
use  "  then."     "  In  this  way"  naturally  leads  to  "  thus,"  "  on  this," 
"thereupon,"  "then." 

"  And  when  this  hail  some  heat  from  Hermia  felt 

So  he  dissolved."— y>/.  N.  D.  i.  i.  245. 

So  is,  therefore,  sometimes   more  emphatic  than  with  us,  as  in 
(arrange  thus,  not  as  Globe) — 

"      Olivia.    To  one  of  your  receiving  enough  is  shown  ; 

A  cypress,  not  a  bosom,  hides  (Fol.)  my  heart (fiaztses) 

So  (i.e.  after  this  confession)  let  me  hear  you  speak. 

yio.  I  pity  you." 

T.  N.  iii.  i.  133. 

So  in  conditional  clauses.     See  Conjunctions,  133. 

67.  So  was  often,  and  correctly,  used  (where  we  use  the  adverbial 
"  such"  or  "so"  with  "a")  before  an  adjective,  e.g.  "so  great  faith" 
where  we  say  " sucJi  great  faith,"  "  so  long  time"  where  we  say  "so 
long  a  time."  We  seem  to  feel  that  "so"  (being  an  adverb,  and  there- 
fore more  liable  to  transposition  than  the  adjective  "such")  requires 
to  be  attached  to  the  word  which  it  qualifies,  either  ( i)  by  introducing 
the  article  which  necessarily  links  together  the  words  thus  :  "so- 
great  a-loss;"  or  else  (2)  by  placing  "so"  in  a  position  where  its 
effect  is  equally  unmistakeable  :  "a-loss  so-great." 

When  the  noun  is  in  the  plural  we  cannot  use  the  former  method ; 
we  are,  therefore,  driven  to  the  latter,  and  instead  of  saying 

"  So  hard  termes. " — N.  P.  176. 
we  say  "terms  so  hard." 


ADVERBS.  51 

"  In  so  profound  abysm  I  throw  all  care."  —  Sonn.  112. 

"  My  particular  grief 

Is  of  so  flood-gate  and  o'erbearing  nature."  —  0.  i.  3.  55. 
"  And  I  will  call  him  to  so  strict  account."  —  I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  149. 
"  With  so  full  soul."—  Temp.  iii.  I.  44. 
"  Of  so  quick  condition."  —  M.  for  M.  i.  I.  54. 
But  note  that  in  these  instances  the  "so"  follows  a  preposition. 
After  prepositions  the  article  (see  Article,  90)  is  frequently  omitted. 
Shakespeare  could  have  written 

"  My  grief  is  of  nature  so  floodgate,"  &c. 
"  I  will  call  him  to  account  so  strict  that,"  &c. 
Our  modern  usage  was  already  introduced  side  by  side  with  the 
other  as  early  as  Wickliffe.     Compare 

"  So  long  time."  —  St.  John  xiv.  9. 
with     "  So  long  a  time."  —  Hebrews  iv.  7. 

68.  Something  used  adverbially,  like  "somewhat." 

"  A  white  head  and  something  a  round  belly." 

2  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  212. 

We  should  say  "  a  somewhat  round,"  placing  the  adverb  between 
the  article  and  the  adjective  so  as  to  show  unmistakeably  that  the 
adverb  qualifies  the  adjective.  "  Something"  may  possibly  be  so 
taken  (though  "somehow"  would  make  better  sense)  in 

matter  in  his  breast."  —  Ham.  iii.  I.  18. 


68  a.  Sometimes,  like  "  sometime,"  is  used  by  Shakespeare  for 
"formerly"  in 

"Thy  sometimes  brother's  wife."  —  Rich.  12.  i.  2.  54. 

So  probably 

"Sometimes  from  her  eyes 

I  did  receive  fair  speechless  messages."  —  M.  of  V.  i.  I.  163. 
Compare  "olim"  in  Latin. 

69.  Still  used  for  constantly,  in  accordance  with  the  derivation 
of  the  word,  "  quiet,"  "unmoved."  It  is  now  used  only  in  the  sense 
of  "  even  now,"  "even  then."  The  connection  between  "during 
all  time  up  to  the  present  "  and  "  even  at  the  present  "  is  natural, 
and  both  meanings  are  easily  derived  from  the  radical  meaning, 
"without  moving  from  its  place."  Comp.  the  different  meanings 
of  dum,  donee,  eo>s,  .&c. 

E  2 


52  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Thou  still  hast  been  the  author  of  good  tidings." 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  42. 

"But  this  thy  countenance  still lock'd  in  steel 
I  never  saw  till  now."—  T.  and  C.  iv.  5.  195. 

i.e.  "  because  it  was  constantly  lock'd  in  steel." 

And  this  is  the  best,  though  not  the  most  obvious,  interpretation  of 

"  But  still  the  house  affairs  would  draw  her  hence." 

Othello,  i.  3.  147. 

It  is  used  as  an  adjective  for  constant  (though  some  suggest 
"silent")  in 

"  But  I  of  thee  will  wrest  an  alphabet, 
And  by  still  practice  learn  to  know  the  meaning." 

T.  A.  iii.  2.  44. 
This  interpretation  is  corroborated  by 

"  But  that  still  use  of  grief  makes  wild  grief  tame, 
My  tongue  should  to  thy  ears  not  name  my  boys." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  3.  229. 

70.  Than  is  used  for  then : 

"  And  their  ranks  began 
To  break  upon  the  galled  shore  and  than 
Retire  again."— R.  of  L.  456. 

Then  for  than/freq.  in  North's  Plutarch,  Ascham,  &c. 

In  O.  E.  the  commonest  forms  are  "thanne"  =  then;  "then" 
=  than. 

Then  and  than  (like  turn  and  tarn,  quum  and  quant  in  Latin)  are 
closely  connected,  and,  indeed,  mere  varieties  of  the  same  word. 
They  were  originally  inflections  of  the  demonstrative,  and  meant  "at 
that  (time),"  "in  that  (way)."  As  "  that "  is  used  as  a  relative, 
"than  "has  the  signification  of  "in  the  way  in  which"  (guam), 
just  as  then  (71)  is  used  for  "  at  the  time  at  which"  (quum}.  It  is 
usual  to  explain  "  He  is  taller  than  I"  thus :  "He  is  taller  ;  then 
I  am  tall."  This  explanation  does  not  so  well  explain  "He  is 
not  taller  than  I."  On  the  whole,  it  is  more  in  analogy  with  the 
German  als,  Latin  quam,  Greek  ff,  to  explain  it  thus  :  "  In  the  way 
in  -which  I  am  tall  he  is  taller."  The  close  connection  between 
"  in  that  way,"  "at  that  time,"  "  in  that  place,"  &c.,  is  illustrated 
by  the  use  of  there  for  thereupon,  or  then. 

"  Even  there  resolved  my  reason  into  tears."— L.  C,  42. 


ADVERBS.  53 

71.  Then   apparently  used   for    "  when."      So   in  E.  E.      See 

That,  284. 

"  And  more  more  strong,  then  lesser  is  my  fear, 
I  shall  endue  you  with  ;  meantime  but  ask,"  &c. 

K.  J.  iv.  2.  42. 

72.  To-fore,  which  was  as  common  in  E.  E.  as  "be-fore".and 
"  a-fore,"  is  found  in 

"  O  would  thou  wert  as  thou  to-fore  hast  been." 

T.  A.  iii.  2.  294. 

73.  TOO,  which  is  only  an  emphatic  form  of  "  to"'  (compare 
irp6s  in  Greek,  used  adverbially),  is  often  spelt  "to"  by  Elizabethan 
writers  (Sonn.  38,  86);  and  conversely,  "too"  is  found  for  "to" 
(Sonn.  56,  135). 

Too  seems  used,   like  the   E.   E.    "to,"   for   "excessively"   in 
Spenser,  Shephear<fs  Calendar,  May : 

"Thilke  same  kidde  (as  I  can  well  devise) 
Was  too  very  foolish  and  unwise." 

Perhaps,  also,  in 

"  Lest  that  your  goods  too  soon  be  confiscate." — C.  of  E.  i.  2.  2. 
though  the  meaning  may  be  "  the  goods  of  you  also." 

"Tempt  him  not  so  too  far." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  11. 
And  there  is,  perhaps,  an  allusion  to  the  E.  E.  meaning  in  "too-too," 
which  is  often  found  in  Elizabethan  English. 

Too  is  often  used  in  the  phrase,  "  I  am  too  blame"  (Folio) 
"  I  am  much  too  blame." 

0.  iii.  3.  211,  282  ;  M.  of  V.  v.  I.  166;  Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  13. 

This  is  so  common  in  other  Elizabethan  authors,  that  it  seems  to 

require  more  explanation  than  the  confusion  between   "to"  and 

"too"  mentioned  above.      Perhaps   "blame"  was  considered  an 

adjective,  as  in 

"In  faith,  my  lord,  you  are  too  •wilful-blame.'1'1 

I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  i.  177. 

and  "  too"  may  have  been,  as  in  E.  E.,  used  for  "  excessively." 
Too  seems  used  for  "very  much,"  or  "too  much,"  in 

"  Tell  him  that  gave  me  this  (wound),  who  lov'd  him  too, 
He  struck  my  soul  and  not  my  body  through." 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iii.  K 


54  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

The  context  will  hardly  admit  of  the  interpretation,  "  Me  who  also 
lov'd  him." 

The  transition  from  the  meaning  of  progressive  motion  to  that  of 
"increasingly"  or  "excessively,"  and  from  "excessively"  to  the 
modern  "  to  excess,"  is  too  natural  to  require  more  than  mention. 

73  a.  What,  when.  What  and  when  are  often  used  as  ex- 
clamations of  impatience  : 

"  What,  Lucius,  ho!"— J.  C.  ii.  I.  1. 
"  When,  Lucius,  when?"— Ib.  5. 

Some  ellipsis  is  to  be  supplied,  "What  (is  the  matter)?"  "When 
(are  you  coming)  ?"  So  in 

"  Gaunt.  Throw  down,  my  son,  the  duke  of  Norfolk's  gage. 
K.  Rich.  And,  Norfolk,  throw  down  his. 
Gaunt.    When,  Harry,  when  ?"—Rich.  II.  i.  I.  162. 

See  also  What,  253. 

74.  Whilst.     "  The  while"  is  often  used  in  accordance  with  the 
derivation  of  the  word  for  "(in)  the  (mean)  time."     The  inflected 
forms  whiles  and  whilest  are  generally  used  as  conjunctions.     But  we 
have 

"  If  you'll  go  fetch  him 
We'll  say  our  song  the  whilst.'1'' — Cymb.  iv.  2.  254. 

75.  Why  (instrumental  case  of  E.E.  hwa,  "who"),  used  after 
"for,"  instead  of  "wherefore."     Like  the  Latin  "quidenim?"  it 
came  after  a  time  to  mean  "for  indeed,"  as 

"  And  send  the  hearers  weeping  to  their  beds  ; 
For  why,  the  senseless  brands  will  sympathise." 

Rich.  II.  v.  I.  40. 

i.e.  "wherefore?  (because)  the  senseless,"  &c.  The  provincialism 
"whyfore"  still  exists.  "For"  does  not  correspond  to  "enim," 
but  is  a  preposition  by  derivation.  Later  writers,  however,  and 
possibly  Shakespeare,  may  have  used  "for"  in  "for  why"  as  a 
conjunction.  Some,  however,  maintain  that  the  comma  should  be 
removed  after  "  for  why,"  and  that  "  for  why"  (like  dvff  &v)  means 
"for  this  that,"  "because,"  the  relative  containing  an  implied 
antecedent. 

A  distinction  seems  drawn  between  "  why  "  and  "  for  what "  in 
"  Why,  or  for  what  these  nobles  were  committed 
Is  all  unknown  to  me,  my  gracious  lady. " — Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  48. 


ADVERBS.  55 

Why,  perhaps,  refers  to  the  past  cause,  for  what  to  the  future 
object. 

"  Ant.  S.   Shall  I  tell  you  -why  ? 

Drom.  S.  Ay,  sir,  and  wherefore ;  for  they  say  every  why  hath  a 
wherefore" — C.  of  E.  ii.  2.  43-45. 

i.e.  "  every  deed  said  to  be  done  owing  to  a  certain  cause  is  really 
done  for  a  certain  object." 
Compare 

1 '  Say,  why  is  this  ?     Wherefore  ?     What  shall  we  do?" 

Hamlet,  i.  4.  57. 

"Why  "and  "how  "are  both  derivatives  of  the  relative,  and  arc 
sometimes  interchanged  in  A.-S.  "Why"  seems  to  have  been 
the  ablative  of  instrument,  and  "how"  the  adverbial  derivative  of 
manner,  from  "who." 

76.  Yet  (up  to  this  time)  is  only  used  now  after  a  negative,  "not 
{yet"  "  never  yet"  &c.     Then  it  was  also  used  before  a.  negative. 

"  For  (as)  yet  his  honour  never  heard  a  play."—  T.  of  Sh.  Ind.  i.  96. 

"  Yet  I  have  not  seen 

So  likely  an  ambassador  of  love. " — M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  92. 
"  Yet  (up  to  this  time)  they  are  not  joined." — A.  and  C.  iv.  12.  1. 
"  I  will  make  one  of  her  women  lawyer  to  me,  for  I  yet  not  under- 
stand the  case  myself." — Cymb.  ii.  3.  80. 

The  following  is  a  remarkable  passage  : 

"    Hel.  You,  Diana, 

Under  my  poor  instructions^/  (still)  must  suffer 
Something  in  my  behalf. 

Diana.  Let  death  and  honesty 

Go  with  your  impositions,  I  am  yours 
Upon  your  will  to  suffer. 

Hel.  Yet  (i.e.  for  the  present)  I  pray  you  ; 

But  with  the  word  the  time  will  bring  on  summer,"  &c. 

A.  W.  iv.  4.  30. 

i.e.  "a  little  longer  I  entreat  your  patience,  but,"  &c. 
Yet  is  also  used  in  this  sense  without  a  distinct  negative : 
"  Solan.   What  news  on  the  Rialto  ? 

Salar.  Why  yet  it  lives  there  uncheck'd  that  Antonio,"  &c. 

M.  ofV.  iii.  i.  1. 

77.  The  adverbs  backward  and  inward  are  used  as  nouns. 
"In  the  dark  backward  and  abysm  of  time." — Temp.  i.  2.  50. 
"  I  was  an  inward  of  his." — M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  138. 


56  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So    "  Thou  losest  here  a  better  where  to  find." — Lear,  i.  I.  264. 
"  Nor  can  there  be  that  deity  in  my  nature 
Of  htre-and-everyivhere."—T.  N.  v.  I.  235. 

i.e.  "the  divine  attribute  of  ubiquity." 
Then,  as  with  us,  was  used  as  an  adjective. 

"Our  then  dictator."  —  CorioL  ii.  2.  93. 
So        "Good  sometime  queen." — Rich.  II.  v.  I.  37. 

"  Our  here  approach."— Macb.  iv.  3. 133.    See  Compounds. 

78.  Adverbs  after  "is."     We  still  say  "that  is  well;"  but, 
perhaps,  no  other  adverb  (except  "  soon")  is  now  thus  used.  Shake- 
speare, however,  has 

"  That's  verily.'"— Tempest,  ii.  I.  321. 
" That's  wort6ify."*—  CorioL  iv.  I.  53. 
"  Lucius'  banishment  was  wrongfully." — T.  A.  iv.  4.  16. 
Some  verb,  as  "said"  or  "done,"  is  easily  understood.     "In 
harbour"  has  the  force  of  a  verb  in 

"  Safely  in  harbour 
Is  the  king's  ship."—  Tempest,  i.  2.  226. 

ARTICLES. 

79.  An,  A,  (Early  Eng.  An,  Ane,  On,  One,  a,  o,)  our  indefinite 
Article,  is  now  distinguished  from  our  Numeral  "one."     In  Early 
English,  as  in  modern  French  and  German,  there  was  no  such  dis- 
tinction.   Hence,  even  in  Elizabethan  English,  a  (since  it  still  repre- 
sented, or  had  only  recently  ceased  to  represent,  "  one")  was  more 
emphatic  than  with  us,  a  fact  which  will  explain  its  omission  where 
we  insert   it,   and  its   insertion  where  we  should  use   some  more 
emphatic  word,  ".some,"  "any,"  "one,"  &c. 

80.  All  and  one,  pronunciation  of.     The  connection  between 
"an  "and  "one"  appears  more  obvious  when  it  is  remembered 
that  "one"  was  probably  pronounced  by  Shakespeare,  not  as  now 
"  won,"  but  "  un."     This  is  made  probable  by  the  constant  elision 
of  "  the  "  before  "  one  "  in  "  th'  one  "  as  in  "  th'  other  :  "  compare 
"th'  one"  in 

"  TK  one  sweetly  flatters,  t'  other  feareth  harm." — R.  of  L.  172. 
*  The  verb  "hear"  may  be  supplied  from  the  context. 


ARTICLES.  57 

So  Rich.  II.  v.  2.  18.  Ben  Jonson  (783)  mentions  as  authorized 
contractions,  "y'once  "  for  "ye  once"  along  with  "y'utter."  Com- 
pare also  the  pun  in  T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  I.  3  : 

"Speed.  Sir,  your  glove. 
Val.       Not  mine ;  my  gloves  are  on. 
Speed.  Why,  then,  this  may  be  yours,  for  this  is  but  one. " 

This  will  explain  the  rhyme  : 

"  So  thanks  to  all  at  once  and  to  each  one 
Whom  we  invite  to  see  us  crowned  at  Scone." 

Macbeth,  v.  8.  74-5. 

In  the  dialect  of  the  North  of  England  and  of  Scotland,  the 
"  w  "  is  still  not  sounded. 

"  An  "  was  always  used  in  A.-S.  and  mostly  in  E.E.  before  con- 
sonants as  well  as  vowels:  "ane  kinges  .  .  .  dohter"  (STRATMANN). 
I  have  not  found  an  instance  in  Shakespeare  of  "an  "before  an 
ordinary  consonant,  but  it  occurs  before  "  w  "  : 

"  Have  an  wish  but  for't."— P.  of  T.  iv.  4.  2. 

81.  A  was  used  for  one  in  such  expressions  as  "  He  came  with 
never  a  friend,"  &c. 

"  He  and  his  physicians  are  of  a  mind." — A.  W.  i.  3.  244. 
"  'Fore  God,  they  are  both  in  a  tale."— M.  Ado,  iv.  2.  33. 
"  An  two  men  ride  of  a  horse  one  must  ride  behind." 

Ib.  iii.  5.  44. 
"  For  in  a  night  the  best  part  of  my  power 

Were  in  the  Washes  .  .  .  devoured."— A".  J.  v.  7.  64. 
So        "  The  Images  were  found  in  a  night  all  hacked  and  hewed." 

N.  P.  172. 

"  We  still  have  slept  together, 
Rose  at  an  instant,  learn'd,  play'd,  eat  together." 

A.  Y.  L.  i.  3.  76. 

"  Myself  and  a  sister  both  born  in  an  hour."—  T. N.  ii.  i.  20. 
"  You,  or  any  living  man,  may  be  drunk  at  a  time,  man." 

Othello,  ii.  3.  319. 
i.e.  "  at  one  time,"  "  for  once." 

"  These  foils  have  all  a  length."—  Hamlet,  v.  2.  227. 
We  find  "one"  and  "a"  interchanged  in 

"  Hear  me  one  word  : 
Beseech  you,  tribunes,  hear  me  but  a  word." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  266. 

' '  But  shall  we  wear  these  honours  for  a  day  ? 
Or  shall  they  last?"— Rich.  HI.  iv.  2.  5. 


58  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  never  use  the  possessive   inflection  of  the  unemphatic  one 
as  an  antecedent ;  but  Shakespeare  writes  : 

"  For  taking  one's  part  that  is  out  of  favour." — Lear,  \.  4.  111. 
We  also  find  in  Early  English  : 

"  Thre  persones  in  a  Godhede." — HALLIWELL. 
where  a  is  for  one.     Compare  Scotch  "  ae"  for  "  one." 
It  seems  used  for  "  any,"  i.e.  ane-y,  or  one-y,  in 

"There's  not  a  one  of  them." — Macb.  iii.  4.  131. 
"Ne'er  a  one  to  be  found." — B.  J.  E.  in  &c.  iii.  2. 

So  Cymb.  i.  I.  24. 
And  emphatically  for  "some,"  "a  certain,"  in 

"  There  is  a  thing  within  my  bosom  tells  me. " 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  183. 
'  I  should  impart  a  thing  to  you  from  his  majesty. " 

Hamlet,  v.  2.  92. 

"  Shall  I  tell  you  a  thing?"— L.  L.  L.  v.  I.  152. 
"  I  told  you  a  thing  yesterday." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  2.  185. 
"  And  I  came  to  acquaint  you  with  a  matter." 

A.  Y.  L.  i.  i.  126. 

82.  A  and  The  omitted  in  archaic  poetry.    In  the  infancy 

of  thought  nouns  are  regarded  as  names,  denoting  not  classes  but 
individuals.  Hence  the  absence  of  any  article  before  nouns. 
Besides,  as  the  articles  interfere  with  the  metre,  and  often  supply 
what  may  be  well  left  to  the  imagination,  there  was  additional 
reason  for  omitting  them.  Hence  Spenser,  the  archaic  poet,  writes 
"  Fayre  Una — whom  salvage  nation  does  adore." 

F.  Q.  i.  6.  Title. 

"  And  seizing  cruell  claives  on  trembling  brest." — Ib.  i.  3.  19. 
"  Faire  virgin,  to  redeem  her  deare,  brings  Arthure  to  the 

fight."— Ib.  i.  8.  Title. 

"  From  raging  spoil  of  lawlesse  victors  will." — Ib.  i.  3.  43. 
"  With  thrilling  point  of  deadly  yron  brand." — Ib.  i.  3.  42. 
Shakespeare  rarely  indulges  in  this  archaism  except  to  ridicule  it: 
"  Whereat  with  blade,  with  bloody  blameful  blade, 
He  bravely  broached  his  boiling  bloody  breast  ; 
And  Thisby,  tarrying  in  mulberry  shade, 
His  dagger  drew  and  died." — M.  N.  D.  v.  I.  147. 
Somewhat  similar  is 

"/«  glorious  Christian/^/."— Rick.  II.  iv.  I.  93. 


ARTICLES.  59 

"  When  lion  rough  in  wildest  rage  doth  roar." 

M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  224. 
"  Ah  !  Richard  with  the  eyes  of  (my  or  the]  heavy  mind" 

Rich.  II.  ii.  4.  18. 
"  So,  longest  way  shall  have  the  longest  moans." 

Ib.  v.  i.  90. 
In  antitheses,  as 

"  And  with  no  less  nobility  of  love 
Than  that  which  dearest  father  bears  his  son," 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  111. 

the  omission  of  the  is  intelligible,  since  the  whole  class  is  expressed. 
But  it  appears  not  uncommon  to  omit  the  article  before  superlatives  : 

"  Best  safety  lies  in  fear." — Hamlet,  i.  3.  41. 

This  is,  perhaps,  explained  by  the  double  meaning  of  the  super- 
lative, which  means  not  only  "  the  best  of  the  class,"  but  also  "  very 
good."  See  8. 

83.  A  and  The  are  also  sometimes  omitted  after  as,  like,  and 
titan  in  comparative  sentences  : 

"  As  falcon  to  the  lure  away  she  flies." — V.  and  A.  1027. 
"  The  why  is  plain  as  way  to  parish  church." 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  52. 
"  More  tuneable  than  lark  to  shepherd's  ear." 

M.  N.  D.  i.  i.  184. 

This  is,  however,  common  both  in  early  and  modern  English. 
In  such  sentences  the  whole  class  is  expressed,  and  therefore  the 
article  omitted.  It  might  be  asked,  however,  why  "  the  lure  "  on 
this  hypothesis?  The  is  put  for  its.  So  in  E.  E.  (MATZNER,  iii.  195) 
"  ase  hound  doth  (chase)  the  hare,"  i.e.  "  its  prey  the  hare." 

A  is  still  omitted  by  us  in  adverbial  compounds,  such  as 
"snail-like,"  "clerk-like,"  &c.  Then  it  was  omitted  as  being  un- 
necessarily emphatic  in  such  expressions  as  : 

"Creeping/z/fcjtta*/." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  146. 
"  Sighing  like  furnace." — Ib.  148. 
"  And  like  unletter'd  clerk"— Sonn.  85. 

"  Like  snail  "  is  an  adverb  in  process  of  formation.  It  is  inter- 
mediate between  "like  a  snail"  and  "snail-like." 

84.  A  being  more  emphatic  than  with  us,  was  sometimes  omitted 
where  the  noun  stands  for  the  class,  and  might  almost  be  replaced  by 
the  corresponding  adjective.    "  If  ever  I  were  traitor,"  Rich.  II.  i.  3. 
201  =  traitorous.     Similarly 


60  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR, 

'  And  having  now  shown  himself  open  enemy  to  Alcibiades." 

N.  P.  176. 

So,  though  we  find  "never  a  master"  in  the  sense  of  "not  one 
master,"  yet  where  the  "  never  "  is  emphasized  and  has  its  proper 
meaning,  "  at  no  time,"  the  a  is  omitted  : 

' '  Those  eyes  which  never  shed  remorseful  tear. " 

Rich.  III.  i.  2.  156. 

"  In  war  was  never  lion  rag'd  so  fierce." — Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  173. 

"  Never  master  had  a  page  so  kind." — Cymb.  v.  5.  85. 

"  Was  ever  king  that  joy'd  an  earthly  throne." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  9.  1. 

"  'Twas  never  merry  world  since,"  &c. — T,  N.  Hi.  I.  109. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  contrast  to  the  example  first  quoted,  when  the 
"never"  is  omitted  and  an  is  emphatic,  almost  like  one,  it  is  in- 
serted : 

'  My  manly  eyes  did  scorn  an  humble  tear. " 

Rich.  III.  i.  2.  165. 

A  is  also  omitted  before  collective  nouns,  such  as  "plenty," 
"abundance,"  &c.,  and  therefore  before  "great  number"  in 

"  Belike  you  slew  great  number  of  his  people." — T.  N.  iii.  3.  29. 

85.  A  inserted  after  some  adjectives  used  as  adverbs : 

"  It  was  upon  this  fashion  bequeathed  me  by  will  but  poor  a 
thousand  pounds. " — A.  Y.  L.  i.  I.  2. 

This  usage  is  found  in  the  earlier  text  of  LAYAMON  (A.D.  1200): 
"  Long  a  time  (longe  ane  stunde),"  ii.  290,  &c.,  where  the  adjective 
appears  merely  to  be  emphasized,  and  not  used  adverbially.  In  the 
later  text  the  adjective  is  placed,  here  and  in  other  passages,  in  its 
ordinary  position.  The  adjectives  "each,"  "such,"  "which," 
(used  for  "of  what  kind,")  and  "many"  were  especially  often  thus 
used.  "At/^amel"  =  "  at  each  meal,"  Piers  Plough.  Crede. 
109.  (So  in  Scotch  "ilka.")  "  IVhiche  a  wife  was  Alceste,'' 
CHAUCER,  C.  T.  11754  =  "what  a  wife."  "On  moni  are  (later 
text,  mani  ane)  wisen,"  LAYAMON,  i.  24  ;  "  monianes  cunnes,"  ib.  39  ; 
"  of  many  a  kind  (/.  /.  of  manian  erthe),"  "  of  many  an  earth." 

The  last-quoted  passages  render  untenable  the  theory  (Arch- 
bishop Trench,  English  Past  and  Present]  which  explains  "many 
a  man"  as  a  corruption  of  "many  of  men."  In  these  passages, 
e.g.  "  moni  anes  cunnes"  ("  of  many  a  race  "),  the  article  or  numeral 


ARTICLES.  6 1 

adjective  "an  "  is  declined  like  an  adjective,  while  "  moni  "  is  not. 
The  inference  is,  that  "moni"  is  used  adverbially.  In  the  same 
way  the  Germans  say  "mancher  (adj.)  mann,"  but  "manch  (adv.) 
ein  mann,"  "«'«  solcher  (adj.)  mann,"  but  "soldi  (adv.)  ein  mann." 
In  A.-S.  the  idiom  was  "many  man,"  not  "many  a  man."  The 
termination  in/,  causing  "many"  to  be  considered  as  adverbially 
used,  may  not  perhaps  account  for  the  introduction  of.  the  a  into 
E.  E.,  but  it  may  account  for  its  retention  in  Elizabethan  and 
modern  English.  Nor  can  it  escape  notice  that  most  of  the 
adjectives  which  take  a  after  them  end  in  ch,  or  lie  ("  like"),  an 
adverbial  termination.  So  beside  the  adjectives  enumerated  above, 
"thellich"  (modern  Dorsetshire,  "thilk"  or  "thick"),  "  the  like," 
answering  to  "whilk"  ("which"),  is  followed  by  a.  So  after  the 
adverb  "  ofte,"  we  have  "  a  day"  in 

"  Ful  ofte  a  day  he  swelde  and  seyde  alas  ! " 

CHAUCER,  Knightes  Tale,  498. 

It  is  perhaps  some  such  feeling,  that  "many"  means  "often,"  which 
justifies  the  separation  of  "  many  "  and  "a  "  in  the  following: 

"  I  have  in  vain  said  many 
A  prayer  upon  her  grave." — W.  T.  v.  3.  144. 

Perhaps  in  this  way  (as  an  adjective  used  adverbially)  we  must 
explain  (compare  "  none  (adj.)  inheritance,"  Acts  vii.  5) : 

' '  Exceeding  pleasant ;  none  (adv. )  a  stranger  there 
So  merry  and  so  gamesome." — Cymb.  i.  6.  59. 

like  "ne'er  a  stranger,"  unless  after  "none"  we  supply  "who 
was." 

A  is  pleonastically  used  in 

"  I  would  not  spend  another  such  a  night." — R.  III.  i.  4.  5. 

In  "  What  poor  an  instrument"  (A.  and  C.  v.  2.  236),  "what" 
is  used  for  "  how." 

86.  A  was  sometimes  omitted   after   "what,"  in   the   sense  of 
"what  kind  of." 

"Cassius,  what  night  is  this?" — J.  C.  i.  3.  42. 
(A  has  been  unnecessarily  inserted  by  some  commentators.) 

"I'll  tell  the  world 

Aloud  what  man  thou  art.'* — M.  for  M.  ii.  4.  153. 
"Jove  knows  what  man  thou  mightst  have  made." 

Cymb.  iv.  2.  207. 


62  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  What  dreadful  noise  of  waters  in  mine  ears." 

Rich.  III.  i.  4.  22. 

"  What  case  stand  I  in?"  (W.  T.  i.  2.  352)  =  In  what  a 
position  am  I  ? 

"  What  thing  it  is  that  I  never 
Did  see  man  die  !" — Cynib.  iv.  4.  35. 

We  omit  the  article  after  "what  "  before  nouns  signifying  a  col- 
lective class,  saying  "what  wickedness!"  but  "what  a  crime!" 
"  what  fruit !"  but  "  what  an  apple !"  Hence  the  distinction  in  the 
following  :  "  What  a  merit  were  it  in  death  to  take  this  poor  maid 
from  the  world !  What  corruption  in  this  life  that  it  will  let  this 
man  live  \"—M.forM.  iii.  I.  240. 
A  is  omitted  after  "  such  :" 

"  Showers  of  blood, 

The  which,  how  far  off  from  the  mind  of  Bolingbroke 
It  is  such  crimson  tempest  should  bedrench,"  &c. 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  46. 

Here  "such"  probably  means  "the  aforesaid,"  referring  to  the 
"  showers  of  blood." 

After  "  such"  in  this  sense  the  indefinite  article  is  still  omitted  ; 
naturally,  since  "  such  "  is  used  in  a  denning  sense. 

A  is  omitted  after  "  many"  in  "  Many  time  and  oft"  (2  Hen.  VI. 
ii.  i.  93).  Here  "many-time,"  like  "some-time,"  "often- times," 
"  many-times"  (MONTAIGNE,  Introduction),  seems  used  as  one  word 
adverbially. 

A  is  omitted  before  "  little,"  where  we  commonly  place  it  in  the 
sense  of  "  some:" 

"  O,  do  not  swear  ; 
Hold  (a)  little  faith,  though  thou  hast  too  much  fear." 

T.  N.  v.  i.  174. 

It  is  perhaps  caused  by  the  antithesis  which  assimilates  the  use  of 
"little"  to  the  use  of  "much."  "In  (a)  little  time  "  (V.  and  A. 
132)  is  to  be  explained  as  a  prepositional  phrase  approximating  to 
an  adverb  :  see  89. 

87.  A  was  frequently  inserted  before  a  numeral  adjective,  for  the 
purpose  of  indicating  that  the  objects  enumerated  are  regarded 
collectively  as  one.  We  still  say  "a  score,"  "a  fo(u)rt(een)-night." 
Ihit  we  also  find  : 

"An  eight  days  after  these  sayings."—  Luke  ix.  28. 


ARTICLES.  63 

"A  two  shilling  or  so."— B.  J.  E.  in  6-v.  i.  4  ad  fin. 
"  Tis  now  a  nineteen  years  agone  at  least." — B.  J.   Case  is  altered. 

A-lso  in  E.  E.  : 

"An  five  mile."— HALLIWELL. 
This  usage  is  not  common  in  Shakespeare,  except  after  "one." 

"But  one  seven  years." — Coriol.  iv.  I.  55. 
The  a  is  omitted  in 

"  But  this  our  purpose  now  is  twelve-month  old." 

I  Hen.  IV.  i.  I.  28. 

Compare  "  This  three  mile.'" — Macbeth,  v.  5.  37. 
The  a  in  "a  many  men,"  "a  few  men,"  is  perhaps  thus  to  be 
explained.     Compare  "  This  nineteen  years"  (M.  for  M.  i.  3.  21), 
with  "This  many  summers"  (Hen.  VIII.  Hi.  2.  360).     So 
"A  many  merry  men." — A.  Y.  L.  i.  I.  119. 
"A  many  thousand  warlike  French." — K.  J.  iv.  2.  199. 

So  Hen.  V.  iv.  i.  127;  iv.  3.  95.     And  still  more  curiously  : 

"But  many  a  many  foot  of  land  the  worse." — K.  J.  i.  I.  183. 

Some  explain  "  a  many  "  by  reference  to  the  old  noun  "  many," 
"a  many  men,"  for  "  a  many  (of)  men. "  And  the  word  is  thus  used : 

"A  many  of  our  bodies." — Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  95. 
"  O  thou  fond  many,  with  what  loud  applause 

Didst  thou  beat  heaven."— 2  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  91. 
"  In  many's  looks." — Sonn.  93. 
So  perhaps  A.  IV.  iv.  5*  55.     Add  "their  meiny"  Lear,  ii.  4.  35. 

Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  in  E.  E.  "of"  is  often  omitted  in  such 
phrases  as  "  many  manner  (of)  men,"  "  a  pair  (of)  gloves,"  &c.  just 
as  in  German  we  have  "  diese  Art  Mensch."  But  we  also  say  "a 
few  men "  (an  expression  that  occurs  as  early  as  Robert  of  Brunne), 
and  "few  "  seems  to  have  been  an  adjective. 

It  is  probable  that  both  the  constructions  above-mentioned  are 
required  to  explain  this  use  of  a.  Thus  "a  hundred  men"  is  for 
"a  hundred  (of)  men,"  but  in  "a  twelvemonth,"  "a  fortnight," 
"  twelve"  and  "  fourteen"  are  not  regarded  as  simple  nouns,  but  as 
compound  nouns  used  adjectively.  Compare  the  double  use  of 
"  mille,"  "millia,"  in  Latin. 


64  SHAKESPEARIAN  GKAMMAK. 

88.  An-Other.     A  is  apparently  put  for  the  in 

"  There  is  not  half  a  kiss  to  choose  who  loves  an  other  best." 

W.  T.  iv.  4.  176. 

This  is,  however,  in  accordance  with  our  common  idiom  :  "they 
love  one  an  other,"  which  ought  strictly  to  be  either  "they  love,  the 
one  the  other,"  or  "  they  love,  one  other."  The  latter  form  is  still 
retained  in  "  they  love  each  other  ;"  but  as  in  "  one  other"  there 
is  great  ambiguity,  it  was  avoided  by  the  insertion  of  a  second  "  one" 
or  "an,"  thus,  "they  love  one  an-other."  This  is  illustrated  by 
Matt.  xxiv.  10  (TYNDALE)  :  "And  shall  bet raye  one  another  and 
shall  hate  one  the  other;"  whereas  WICKLIFFE  has,  "ech  other." 
So  I  Cor.  xii.  25  :  WICKLIFFE,  "ech  for  other;"  the  rest  "for  one 
another."  "One  another"  is  now  treated  almost  like  a  single 
noun  in  prepositional  phrases,  such  as,  "We  speak  to  one  another." 
But  Shakespeare  retains  a  trace  of  the  original  idiom  in 

"  What  we  speak  one  to  an  other."— A.  W.  iv.  i.  20. 

89.  The  was  frequently  omitted  before  a  noun  already  defined 
by  another  noun,  especially  in  prepositional  phrases. 

"/«  number  Q{  our  friends." — y.  C.  iii.  I.  216. 

11  Since  death  of  my  dearest  mother." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  190. 

"  At  keel  of  tia&\.  defy  him."—  A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  160. 

"/;*  absence  of  thy  friend."—  T.  G.  of  V.  \.  I.  59. 

"  To  sternage  of  their  navy." — Hen.  V.  iii.  Prol.  18. 

"  To  relief  of  lazars."— Ib.  i.  I.  15. 

"  For  honour  of  our  land. " — Ib.  iii.  5.  22. 

"  Thy  beauty's  form  in  table  of  my  heart." — Sonn.  24. 

"  Some  beauty  peep'd  through  lattice  <?/"sear'd  age." 

L.  C.  st.  ii. 

"Forage  in  blood  of  French  nobility." — Hen.  V.  i.  2.  110. 
"  In  cradle oj 'the  rude  imperious  surge." — 2 Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  20. 
"  Proving/rom  world's  minority  their  right." — R.  of  L. 
"  On  most  part  of  their  fleet. "  —  Othello,  ii.  I.  24. 
So  i  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  77  ;  2  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  36,  79;  Rich.  II.  i.  3.  136. 
We  could  say  "  in  season,"  but  not 

"We  at  (the  right)  time  of  (the)  year 

Do  wound  the  bark." — Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  57. 
So  even  in  Pope  : 

"  Alas,  young  man,  your  days  can  ne'er  be  long  ; 
\\iflower  of  age  you  perish  for  a  song." 

POPE,  Imit.  Hor.  i.  102. 


ARTICLES.  65 

90.  The  is  also  omitted  after  prepositions  in  adverbial  phraset. 
"  At  door.  "-W.  T.  iv.  4.  352;  T.  of  Sh.  iv.  I.  125. 
"  At  palace."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  731. 
"  At  height."— Hamlet,  \.  4.  21. 
"  Ere  I  went  to  •wars.'" — M.  Ado,  i.  I.  307. 
"  To  cabin."— Tempest,  i.  I.  17. 
"  The  grace  'fore  meat  and  the  thanks  at  end." 

Coriol.  iv.  7.  4. 

"  You  were  in  presence  then." — Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  62. 
i.e.  "in  the  presence-chamber." 

"  And  milk  comes  frozen  home  in  pail." — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  925. 
"  With  spectacles  on  nose  and  pouch  on  side" 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  159. 
"  This  day  was  viewed  in  open  as  his  queen." 

Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  405. 
"  He  foam'd  at  mouth."— J.  C.  i.  2.  256. 
"  Sticks  me  at  heart."— A.  Y.  L.  i.  2.  254. 
"  Exeunt  in  manner  as  they  entered." — Ib.  ii.  4.  242. 
"  Than  pard  or  cat-o'-mountain." — Tempest,  iv.  I.  262. 

And  with  adjectives  : 

"  In  humblest  manner. " — Tempest,  ii.  4.  144. 
"/w/rtfrank." — Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  161. 

"  In  pail"  is  as  justifiable  as  "in  bed,"  except  that  the  former, 
not  being  so  common  as  the  latter,  has  not  the  same  claim  to  the 
adverbial  brevity  which  dispensed  with  the  article.  Both  are  adver- 
bial phrases,  one  of  which  has  been  accepted,  the  other  rejected. 
Thus  in 

"  Stealing  unseen  to  west  with  this  disgrace." — Sonn.  33. 

"  to-west  "  is  as  much  an  adverb  as  "  west-ward." 
Sometimes  a  possessive  adjective  is  thus  omitted : 

"  Not  Priamus  and  Hecuba  on  knees"— Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  3.  53. 
So  in  E.   E.  "a-knee." 

Compare  our  "  I  have  at  hand." 

Perhaps  this  may  explain  the  omission  of  "  the"  after  "at"  in 

"  We  are  familiar  at  first."— Cymb.  i.  4.  112. 

where  "at  first"  is  not  opposed  to  "afterwards"  (as  it  is  with  us), 
but  means  "at  tJie  first,"  or  rather  "from  the  first,"  "at  once." 

F 


66  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

The  omission  of  "  the"  in 

"  On  one  and  other  side  Trojan  and  Greek 

Sets  all  on  hazard." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  I.  21. 

is  in  accordance  with  our  idiom,  "  one  another"  and  "  each  other." 
On  the  other  hand,  where  "  the"  is  emphatic,  meaning  "  that "  or 
"  the  right,"  it  is  sometimes  inserted  before  "one." 

"  Morocco,   How  shall  I  know  if  I  do  choose  the  right  ?" 
Portia.     The  one  of  them  contains  my  picture,  prince." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  7.  11. 

91.  The  was  inserted  in  a  few  phrases  which  had  not,  though 
they  now  have,  become  adverbial.     "At  the  length"  (N.  P.  592), 
"  At  the  first,"  "  At  the  last,"  &c. 

"There  in  the  full  convive  we."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  5.  272. 
"  In  the  favour  of  the  Athenians." — N.  P.  177. 

92.  The  used  to  denote  notoriety,  &c.    Any  word  when  referred 
to  as  being  defined  and  well  known  may  of  course  be  preceded  by 
the  article.    Thus  we  frequently  speak  of  "  the  air. "    Bacon  (E.  231) 
however  wrote,  "  The  matter  (the  substance  called  matter)  is  in  a 
perpetual  flux." 

The  is  sometimes  used  (compare  Latin  "ille")  for  "//^celebrated," 
"'  the  one  above  all  others,"  occasionally  with  "  alone,"  as 

"  I  am  alone  the  villain  of  the  earth." — A.  and  C.  iv.  6.  30. 
Or  wii.li  a  superlative  : 

"  He  was  the  -wretched' st  thing  when  he  was  young." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  18. 

"  The  last  (prayer)  is  for  my  men  :  they  are  the  poorest ; 
But  poverty  could  never  draw  'em  from  me." 

Hen.  VIII.  iv.  2.  148. 
But  also  without  these  : 

"  Am  I  the  man  yet?"— A.  Y.  L.  iii.  3.  3. 

"  Smacks  it  not  something  of  the  policy?" — K.  J.  ii.  i.  39(J. 

"  For  their  dear  causes 
Would  to  the  bleeding  and  the  grim  alarm 
Excite  the  mortified  man. "— Mac beth,  v.  2.  4. 

The  ellipsis  to  be  supplied  is  added  in 

"  Are  you  the  courtiers  and  the  travell'd  gallants  ? 
The  spritely  fellows  that  the  people  talk  of?" 

B.  and  F.  Elder  Brother,  iv.  i. 


ARTICLES.  67 

The  seems  to  mean  "  the  same  as  ever"  in 

"  Live  you  the  marble-breasted  tyrant  still." — T.  N.  v.  I.  127. 

It  is  rot  often  that  "the"  is  used  in  this  sense  before  English 
proper  names.  In 

"The  Douglas  and  the  Percy  both  together." 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  i.  116. 

the  second  the  may  be  caused  by  the  first,  which,  of  course,  is  still 
used,  "the  Bruce,"  "the  Douglas,"  being  frequent,  and  explicable 
as  referring  to  the  chief  of  the  Douglases  and  Bruces.  But  we  also 
have 

"  To  leave  the  Talbot  and  to  follow  us."— I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  20,  33. 
and  so  in  Early  English  "  the  Brute,"  "  the  Herod." 

The  is  seldom  used,  like  the  article  in  French,  for  the  possessive 
adjective  : 

*  The  king  is  angry  :  see,  he  bites  the  lip." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  2.  27. 

The  word  "better"  is  used  as  a  noun,  and  opposed  to  "the 
worse,"  (compare  the  French  proverb,  "  le  mieux  est  1'ennemi 
du  bien,")  in 

"  Bad  news,  by'r  lady;  seldom  comes  the  better." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  3.  4. 

"  Death,"  the  ender  of  life,  seems  more  liable  to  retain  the  mark 
of  notoriety  than  "  life."  Hence 

"  Where  they  feared  the  death,  they  have  borne  life  away." 
Ih-n.   V.  iv.  i.  81  ;  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  179  ;  ii.  3.  5f>. 

So    "  Dar'd  to  the  combat."— Hamlet,  i.  I.  84. 
i.e.  "the  combat  that  ends  all  dispute."     French  influence  is  per- 
ceptible in  these  two  last  instances,  and  in 

"  To  shake  the  head."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  15. 

The  which  (see  Relative),  270. 

93.  The  frequently  precedes  a  verbal  that  is  followed  by  an 
object  : 

"  Whose  state  so  many  had  the  managing." — Hen.  V.  Epilog. 
"  You  need  not  fear  the  having  any  of  these  lords." 

M.  ofV.  L  2.  109. 
"  The  seeing  these  effects  will  be 
Both  noisome  and  infectious." — Cymb.  i.  5.  25. 
F  2 


68  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  P.  Pray,  sir,  in  what  ? 
D.   In  M*  delaying  death.  "-M.  for  M.  iv.  2.  172. 

"  Nothing  in  his  life 

Became  him  like  the  leaving  \t.n—Macb.  i.  4-  8. 
"  The  locking  up  the  spirits."— Cymb.  i.  5.  41. 

So    Lear,  iv.  4.  9  ;    Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  347  ;    M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  126  ; 
3/.  </  f7.  iv.  i.  309  ;  M.  Ado,  ii.  2.  53  ;  0.  iii.  4.  22  ;  7*.  -M  i.  5.  84. 

The  question  naturally  arises,  are  these  verbals,  "locking,"  &c. 
nouns?  and,  if  so,  why  are  they  not  followed  by  "of," — e.g.  "the 
locking  </the  spirits"?  Or  are  they  parts  of  verbs?  and  in  that 
case,  why  are  they  preceded  by  the  article  ?  The  fact  that  a  verb  in 
E.  E.  had  an  abstract  noun  in  -ing  (A.-S.  -ung}—e.g.  "slaeten,"  to 
hunt ;  "slaeting,"  hunting— renders  it  a  priori  probable  that  these 
words  in  -ing  are  nouns.  Very  early,  however,  the  termination  -ng 
was  confused  with,  and  finally  supplanted,  the  present  participle 
termination  in  ~nde.  Thus  in  the  earlier  text  of  Layamon  (iii.  72) 
we  have  "heo  riden  singinge"  i.e.  "they  rode  singing ;"  and  in  the 
later  text  the  proper  participial  form  "singtnJe."  An  additional 
element  of  confusion  was  introduced  by  the  gerundial  inflection  ennet 
t.g.  " singenne, "  used  after  the  preposition  "to."  As  early  as  the 
twelfth  century  "to  singenne"  (Morris,  E.  E.  Specimens,  p.  53) 
became  "to  singende,"  and  hence  (by  the  corruption  above  men- 
tioned) "to  singinge."  Hence,  when  Layamon  writes  that  the 
king  went  out  "  an-slaeting  "  (ii.  88),  or  "a-slatinge"  (iii.  168),  it  is 
not  easy  to  prove  that  the  verbal  noun  is  here  used  :  for  the  form 
may  represent  the  corruption  of  the  gerund  used  with  the  preposition 
"an"  instead  of  with  "'to."  And  as  early  as  Layamon  we  find  the 
infinitive  "to  kumen"  side  by  side  with  the  present  participle  "to 
comende"  (i.  49) ;  and  the  gerund  "cumene"  side  by  side  with  the 
verbal  "coming"  (iii.  231) ;  and  the  noun  "tiding(s)"  spelt  in  the 
earlier  text  "tiHind"  or  "tidinde,"  the  present  participle  (i.  59). 
The  conclusion  is,  that  although  "  locking  "  is  a  noun,  and  therefore 
preceded  by  "the,"  yet  it  is  so  far  confused  with  the  gerund  as  to 
be  allowed  the  privilege  of  governing  a  direct  object.  The  "of" 
was  omitted  partly  for  shortness,  as  well  as  owing  to  the  confusion 
above  mentioned. 

It  is  easy  to  trace  a  process  of  abridgment  from 

41  For  the  repealing  of  my  banish'd  brother,"—  J.  C.  iii.  I.  51. 


ARTICLES.  69 

to  (2)  "  Punish  my  life  for  (89)  tainting  of  my  love," 

T.  N.  v.  i.  141. 

down  to  our  modern  (3)  "  for  tainting  my  love."  And  hence  the  E.  E. 
(William  of  Palerne,  edit.  Skeat),  "for  drede  of  descuverynge  of 
that  was  do,"  1.  1024,  "of  kastyng  o/lokes,"  1.  942,  are  abbreviated 
in  modern  English  into  "disclosing  that  which  was  done"  and 
"casting  looks."  This  abbreviation  is  also  remarkably  illustrated 
by  Bacon  in  his  third  Essay.  He  first  uses  the  abbreviated  form, 
and  then,  with  a  verbal  noun  that  could  not  so  easily  have  a  verbal 
force,  he  adopts  the  full  form  :  "Concerning  the  Means  of  procuring 
Unity.  Men  must  beware  that  in  the  Procuring  or  Muniting  of 
Religious  Lnity,  they  do  not  dissolve  and  deface  the  Laws  of 
Charity."  It  is  perhaps  this  feeling  that  the  verbal  was  an  ordinary 
noun,  which  allows  Shakespeare  to  make  an  adjective  qualify  it 
even  though  of  is  omitted  after  it. 

"He  shall  have  old  turning  the  key." — Macbeth,  ii.  3.  2. 
The  substantival   use   of  the   verbal  with   "the"  before  it  and 
"of"  after  it  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  colloquial.     Shake- 
speare puts  into  the  mouth  of  Touchstone  : 

' '  I  remember  the  kissing  of  her  batlet  and  .  .  .  the  wooing  oj 
a  peascod  instead  of  her." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  4.  49-51. 

"  Did  these  bones  cost  no  more  (in)  the  breeding?" 

Hamlet,  v.  I.  1(10. 

94.  The  (in  Early  Eng.  thi,  thy)  is  used  as  the  ablative  of  the 
demonstrative  and  relative,  vrith  comparatives  to  signify  the  measure 
of  excess  or  defect. 

This  use  is  still  retained.  "  The  sooner  the  better,"  i.e.  "By  hou< 
much  the  sooner  by  so  much  the  better."  (Lat.  "quo  citius,  eo  melius." ) 

It  is  sometimes  stated  that  "the  better"  is  used  by  Shakespeare 
for  "  better,"  &c. :  but  it  will  often,  perhaps  always,  be  found  that 
the  has  a  certain  force. 

"  The  good  conceit  I  hold  of  thee 
Makes  me  the  better  to  confer  with  thee."—  T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  2.  19. 

"  The  rather 
For  that  I  saw."— Macb.  iv.  3.  184. 

In  both  passages  "  the  "  means  "  on  that  account."     In 

"  Go  not  my  horse  the  better 
I  must  become  a  borrower  of  the  night," — Macb.  iii.  r.  "1~>. 

Banquo  is  perhaps  regarding  his  horse  as  racing  against  night,,  and 


70  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  /^better"  means  "the  better  of  the  two."  The  following  pas- 
sage has  been  quoted  by  commentators  on  the  passage  just  quoted, 
to  show  that  "the"  is  redundant.  "And  hee  that  hit  it  (the 
quintain)  full,  if  he  rid  not  the  faster,  had  a  sound  blow  in  his 
neck,  with  a  bag  full  of  sand  hanged  on  the  other  end." — STOWE'S 
Sun>cy  of  London,  1603.  But  the  rider  is  perhaps  here  described 
as  endeavouring  to  anticipate  the  blow  of  the  quintain  by  being 
"the  faster"  of  the  two.  Or  more  probably,  "the  faster"  may 
mean  the  faster  because  he  had  struck  the  quintain,  which,  if  struck, 
used  to  swing  round  and  strike  the  striker  on  the  back,  unless  he 
rode  tJte  ("  on  that  account ")  faster.  In  either  case  it  is  unscholar- 
like  to  say  that  the  is  redundant. 


CONJUNCTIONS. 

95.  And  (in  old  Swedish  an  [Wedgewood]  is  used  for  "and," 
"if,"  and  "even")  emphatically  used  for  "also,"  "even,"  "and 
that  too."  We  still  use  "and  that"  to  give  emphasis  and  call 
attention  to  an  additional  circumstance,  e.g.  "He  was  condemned, 
and  that  unheard."  This  construction  is  most  common  in  parti- 
cipial phrases.  The  "that "  is  logically  unnecessary,  and  is  omitted 
by  Shakespeare. 

"  Suffer  us  to  famish  and  their  storehouses  crammed  with  grain. >r 
—  Coriol.  i.  i.  82. 

"  And  shall  the  figure  of  God's  majesty 
Be  judged  by  subject  and  inferior  breath, 
And  he  himself  not  present  ?"— A'/V//.  77.  iv.  I.  129. 
"When  I  have  most  need  to  employ  a  friend, 
And  most  assured  that  he  is  a  friend, 
Deep,  hollow,  treacherous,  and  full  of  guile 
Be  he  unto  mt."—Rich.  III.  ii.  i.  37. 

In  the  last  two  passages  an  ellipsis  of  "  be  "  or  "  to  be  "  might  be 
understood,  but  scarcely  in  the  following  : 

'  So  may  he  ever  do  and  ever  flourish 
When  I  shall  dwell  with  worms,  and  my  poor  name 
Banish'd  the  kingdom." — Hen.  VIII.  iv.  2.  126. 
"  The  friends  thou  hast,  and  their  adoption  tried, 
Grapple  them  to  the  soul  with  hoops  of  steel." 

Hamlet,  i.  3.  62. 
Compare  3  Hen.   VI.  i.  2.  47  ;    Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  51. 


CONJUNCTIONS.  71 

So  perhaps  Hamlet,  iii.  3.  62;  T.  N.  i.  I.  38;  and  in  the  following 
irregular  sentence : 

"  But  a  man  that  were  to  sleep  your  sleep,  and  a  hangman  to  help 
him  to  bed,  I  think  he  (redundant  pronoun  :  see  243)  would  change 
places  with  his  officer." — Cymb.  v.  4.  179. 

i.e.  "  and  that  too  a  hangman  being  ready  to  help  him  to  bed." 

96.  And.     This  use,  though  most  frequent  with  participles,  is 
also  found  without  them  : 

"  Here  comes  a  spirit  of  his,  and  to  torment  me." 

Temp.  ii.  2.  15. 

"He  that  has  and  a.  little  tiny  wit." — Lear,  iii.  2.  74. 
i.e.  "a  little  and  that  a  very  little."     So 

"  When  that  I  was  and  a  little  tiny  boy." — T.  N.  v.  I.  398. 

97.  And  is  frequently  found  in  answers  in  the  sense  of  "you 
are  right  and"  or  "yes  and,"  the  "yes"  being  implied.*     Hence 
the   "and,"  introducing  a  statement    in   exact  conformity  with   a 
previous  statement,  comes  almost  to  mean  "exactly."      It  is  fre- 
quently found  before  "so." 

"Hamlet.  Will  the  king  hear  i\\\s  piece  of  work  ? 

Pol.  (Yes)  And  the  queen  too." — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  53. 
"  Cast.  This  rudeness  is  a  sauce  to  his  good  wit. 

Brut.  And  so  it  is."— J.  C.  i.  2.  307. 

i.e.  "you  are  right,  and  so  it  is  ;"  or  "just  so,"  "  even  so." 

"  Pompey.  I'll  try  you  on  the  shore. 
Antony.  And  shall,  sir."— A.  ami  C.  ii.  7.  134. 

i.e.  "You  say  well,  and  you  shall,"  or  "So  you  shall,"  "that  you 
shall,  "emphatically. 

"  Sir  M.  And  there's  ...  a  head  of  noble  gentlemen. 

Archbishop.  And  so  there  is."— I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  4.  27. 
"  Parollcs.  After  them,  and  take  a  more  dilated  farewell. 

Bertram.  Audi  will  do  so."— A.  W.  ii.  i.  60. 

i.e.   "  that  is  just  what  I  will  do." 

"Mayor.  But  I'll  acquaint  our  duteous  citizens 
With  all  your  just  proceedings  in  this  cause. 
Glouc.  And  to  that  end  we  wish'd  your  lordship  here." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4-  67- 
i.e.  "To  that  very  end,"  "  even  to  that  end." 

*  So  -jap  in  Greek. 


-72  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

98.  And  is  often  found  in  this  emphatic  sense  after  statements 
implied   by  ejaculations,  such  as  "faith,"   "sooth,"   "alas,"  &c. 
Thus 

"  Catesby.  Your  friends. at  Pomfret,  they  do  need  the  priest. 

Hastings.  Good  faith  (it  is  so),  and  when  I  met  this  holy  man 
Those  men  you  talk  of  came  into  my  mind. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  2.  117. 

"  Faith,  ana1  so  we  should."— I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  52. 
This  use  is  found  in  A.-S. 

99.  "And"  emphatic  in  questions.  When  a  question  is  being 
asked,  "and,"  thus  used,  does  not  express  emphatic  assent,  but 
emphatic  interrogation  : 

"Alas!  and  would  you  take  the  letter  of  her?"— A.  W.  iii.  4.  1. 
i.e.  "  is  it  so  indeed,  and  further  would  you  actually  &c.?"     So 

"Andvtilt  thou  learn  of  me?" — Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  269. 
i.e.  "  do  you  indeed  wish  to  learn  of  me  ?" 
Hence  Ben  Jonson,  who  quotes  Chaucer  : 

"What,  quoth  she,  and  be  ye  wood?" 
adds  that 

"  And,  in  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  serveth  for  admiration."— 
B.  J.  789. 

It  is  common  in  ballads,  and  very  nearly  redundant  : 
"  The  Perse  owt  of  Northumberlande, 

AndmvQvr  to  God  made  he."— Percy  (MATZNER). 
(Mr.  Furnivall  suggests  "an  avow,"  the  original  form  of  the  word 
"vow.") 

100.  "And"  for  "also"  in  Early  English.  We  find  "and" 

often  used  for  "also,"  "both,"  &c.,  and  standing  at  the  beginning 
a  sentence  in  earlier  English.     Wickliffe  has,  2  Cor.  xi.  21,  22  : 

"  In  what  thing  ony  man  dare,  and  I  dare.     Thei  ben  ebreus, 
ana  I. 

"  And  "  is  used  for  "  even  "  or  "  also  "  in  Acts  xiv.  15  : 

"  And  we  ben  deedli  men  like  you." 
In     "I  almost  die  for  food,  and  let  me  have  it," 

A.   Y.  L.  ii.  7.  104. 

"  I  pray  you  "  may  perhaps  be  understood  after  and,  implied  in  the 
imperative  «'let." 


CONJUNCTIONS.  73 

101.  And  or  an  ( =  if)-     (The  modern  and  is  often  spelt  an  in 
E.  E.)     This  particle  has  been  derived  from  an,  the  imperative  of 
unnan,  to  grant.     This  plausible  but  false  derivation  was  originated 
by  Home   Tooke,  and   has  been   adopted   by  the   editors   of  the 
Cambridge  Shakespeare.      But  the  word  is  often  written  and  in 
Early  English  (Stratmann),  as  well  as  in  Elizabethan  authors.* 

"  For  and  I  shulde  rekene  every  vice 
Which  that  she  hathywiss,  I  were  to  nice."— CHAUC.  Squires  Prol. 

"  Alcibiades  bade  the  carter  drive  over,  and  he  durst." — N.P.  166. 

"They  will  set  an  house  on  fire  and  it  were  but  to  roast  their 
eggs."— B.  E.  89. 

"What  knowledge  should  we  have  of  ancient  things -past  and 
history  were  not  ?" — Lord  BERNERS,  quoted  by  B.  J.  789. 

102.  "And"  with  the  Subjunctive.     The  true  explanation 
appears  to  be  that  the  hypothesis,  the  if,  is  expressed  not  by  the 
and,  but  by  the  subjunctive,  and  that  and  merely  means  with  the 
addition  of,  plus,  just  as  but  means  leaving  out,  or  minus. 

The  hypothesis  is  expressed  by  the  simple  subjunctive  thus  : 

"  Go  not  my  horse  the  better 
I  must  become  a  borrower  of  the  night." — Macb.  iii.  I.  25. 

This  sentence  with  and  would  become,  "  I  must  become  a  bor- 
rower of  the  night  and  my  horse  go  not  the  better,"  i.e.  "with,  or 
on,  the  supposition  that  ray  horse  go  not  the  better."  Similarly  in  the 
contrary  sense,  "  but  my  horse  go  the  better,"  would  mean  "  without 
or  excepting  the  supposition  that  my  horse,  &c."  Thus  Chaucer,  Par- 
donere's  Tale,  275  : 

"  It  is  no  curtesye 
To  speke  unto  an  old  man  vilonye 
But  he  trespas." 

So  also  Mandeville  (Prologue)  : 

"  Such  fruyt,  thorgh  the  which  every  man  is  saved,  but  it  be  his 
owne  defaute." 

103.  And  if.     Latterly  the  subjunctive,  falling  into  disuse,  was 
felt  to  be  too  weak  unaided  to  express  the  hypothesis  ;  and  the  same 
tendency  which  introduced  "more  better,"  "most  unkindest,"  &c., 
superseded  and  by  and  if,  an  if,  and  if.     There  is  nothing  remark- 
able in  the  change  of  and  into  an.    And,  even  in  its  ordinary  sense, 
is  often  written  an  in  Early  English.     (See  lialliwell. ) 

*  So  almost  always  in  the  Folio.     Sec  Index  to  Plays. 


74  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

And  or  an  is  generally  found  before  a  personal  pronoun,  or  "if," 
or  "though  ;"  rarely  thus  : 

"And  *  should  the  empress  know."—  T.  A.  ii.  r.  69. 
In  the  Elizabethan  times  the  indicative  is  often  used   for  the 
subjunctive. 

The  following  is  a  curious  passage  : — 

" 0.  Will  it  please  you  to  enter  the  house,  gentlemen? 

D.  And  your  favour,  lady."  — B.  J.  Sit.  Worn.  iii.  2.  med. 
Apparently,  "And  your  favour  (be  with  us),"  i.e.  "if  you  please." 

104.  An't  were  was  wrongly  said  by  Home  Tooke  to  be  put 
for  "as  if  it  were." 

"  Cress.  O  !  he  smiles  valiantly. 
Pand.  Does  he  not  ? 

Cress.   O  yes  ;  and*  'twere  a  cloud  in  autumn." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  2.  139. 
"  He  will  weep  you  arft  were  a  man  born  in  April." 

Ib.  i.  2.  189. 

"  I  will  roar  you  and*  'twere  any  nightingale."— M.  N.  D.  i.  2.  86. 
"  'A  made  a  fairer  end  and  went  away,  and  *  //  had  been  a  Chris- 
torn  child."— Hen.  V.  ii.  3.  10. 

Some  ellipsis  is  probably  to  be  understood.    "  I  will  roar  you,  and 
if  it  were  a  nightingale  (I  would  still  roar  better)." 
The  same  construction  is  found  in  E.  E. 

"Ye  answer  and yz  were  twenty  yere  olde." 

Cov.  Myst.  p.  80  (MATZNER;. 

It  is  illustrated  by  the  use  of  "ac,"  "  atque,"  after  "similis," 
"pariter,"  &c.  thus  : 

"  (Homo)  qui  prosperis  rebus  seque  ac  tu  ipse  (gauderes)  gaud- 
tret." — ClC.  De  Amicitia,  vi.  I. 

i.e.  "a  man  who  would  rejoice  at  your  prosperity,  and  you  yourself 
^would  rejoice  as  much  and  no  more)."  "  You  answer  in  such  and 
such  a  way,  and  were  you  twenty  years  old  you  would  answer 
similarly." 

105.  And  if  represents  both   "even  if"  and  "if  indeed"  (i.e. 
both  /col  «  and  et  Kal). 

And  if  is  used  emphatically  for  "  even  if"  in 
"  It  dies  and*  if  it  had  a  thousand  lives."—  I  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  75. 
So  I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  125. 

*  So  Folio. 


CONJUNCTIONS.  75 

"  What  and  *  */ 

His  sorrows  have  so  overwhelm'd  his  wits. "  —  Tit.  And.  iv.  4,  10. 

"  He  seems  to  be  of  great  authority,  give  him  gold.  And  though 
authority  be  a  stubborn  bear,  yet  he  is  oft  led  by  the  nose  with 
gold."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  831. 

On  the  other  hand,  and  if  seems  to  mean  "  if  indeed  "  in  the 
following  passages :  — 

"  Percy.  Seize  it  if  thou  darest. 
Aum.  And*  if  I  do  not,  may  my  hands  rot  off!" 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  49. 
"  Oh  father ! 

And  if  you  be  my  father,  think  upon 

Don  John  my  husband." — MiDDLETON  and  ROWLEY  (Walker). 
"  Prince.   I  fear  no  uncles  dead  (419). 
Glou.  Nor  none  that  live,  I  hope. 

Prince.  And*  if  they  live,  I  hope  I  need  not  fear," 

Rich.  III.  iii.  2.  148, 

where  the  Prince  is  referring  to  his  maternal  uncles  who  have  been 
imprisoned  by  Richard,  and  he  says,  "  if  indeed  they  live  I  need 
not  fear." 

Thus  probably  we  must  explain  : 

"  O  full  of  danger  is  the  duke  of  Gloucester  ! 
And  the  queen's  sons  and  brothers  haught  and  proud  ; 
And  were  they  to  be  ruled,  and  not  to  rule, 
This  sickly  land  might  solace  as  before." — Rich.  III.  ii.  3.  29. 

Here,  at  first  sight,  "but"  seems  required  instead  of  "and."  But 
"am/were  they"  means  "  if  indeed  they  were." 

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether  and  though  is  used  for  "  even 
though"  or  for  "  though  indeed  "  in  the  following — 

"  I  have  now 

(And  though  perhaps  it  may  appear  a  trifle) 
Serious  employment  for  thee." — MASSINGER  (Walker). 
In  all  these  passages  an  or  and  may  be  resolved  into  its  proper 
meaning  by    supplying    an    ellipsis.        Thus  in  the  passage  from 
Kick.   II.  iv.  i.   49,    "And  if  I  do  not,"  &c.  means,  "  I  will  seize  it, 
and,  if  I  do  not  seize  it,  may  my  hands  rot  off. " 

106.  Ast  (A.-S.  "eall-ni'a"  with  the  sense  "just  as")  is  a  con- 
traction of  al(l)-so.  In  Early  English  we  find  "so  soon  so  he 
came."  The  al(l)  emphasized  the  so,  "  al(l)-so  soon  al(l)-so  he 

*  So  Folio.  t  Comp.  ir,  u>are,  for  the  various  meanings. 


76  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

came."  Hence  through  different  contractions,  alse,  alst  ase,  we  get 
our  modern  as.  (Comp.  the  German  als.)  The  dropping  of  the 
/  is  very  natural  if  alse  was  pronounced  like  "half."  The  broad 
pronunciation  of  as  may  throw  light  upon  the  pun  in 

"Sir  And.  And  your  horse  now  would  make  him  an  ass. 
Mar.  Ass  I  doubt  not."—  T.  N.  ii.  3.  185. 

It  follows  that  as  originally  meant  both  our  modern  so,  "in  that 
way,"  and  our  modern  as,  "in  which  way."  The  meaning  of  so 
is  still  retained  in  the  phrases  "as  soon  as"  and  "I  thought  as 
much,"  &c.,  but  generally  as  has  its  second  meaning,  viz.  "  in 
which  way." 

107.  As,  like  "an"  (102),  appears  to  be  (though  it  is  not)  used 
by  Shakespeare  for  as  if.     As  above  (102),  the  "  if"  is  implied  in 
the  subjunctive. 

"  To  throw  away  the  dearest  thing  he  owed 
As  'twere  a  careless  trifle." — Macb.  i.  4.  11.     So  v.  5.  13. 

i.e.  "in  the  way  in  which  (he  would  throw  it  away)  were  it  a 
careless  trifle."  Often  the  subjunctive  is  not  represented  by  any 
inflection  : 

"  One  cried,  '  God  bless  us,'  and  '  Amen '  the  other, 
As  they  had  seen  me  with  these  hangman's  hands." 

Macbeth,  ii.  i.  28  ;  Rich.  II L  iii.  5.  63. 
Sometimes  the  as  is  not  followed  by  a  finite  verb  : 

"  As  gentle  and  as  jocund  as  (if  I  were  going)  to  jest, 
Go  I  to  fight."— Rich.  II.  i.  3.  95. 

108.  As,  like  "who,"  "whom,"  "which"  (see  below,  Relative), 
is  occasionally  followed  by  the  supplementary  "  that." 

"  Who  fair  him  'quited  as  that  courteous  was." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  i.  30. 

109.  As  for  "that"  after  "so."     ("  In  which  way ;"  "As  the 
result  of  which.")     This  is  a  consequence  of  the  original  connection 
of  as  with  "so." 

"You  shall  be  so  received 
As  you  shall  deem  yourself  lodged  in  my  heart. " 

L.  L.  L.  ii.  i.  174. 

"  Catesby  .  .  .  finds  the  testy  gentleman  so  hot 
As  he  will  lose  his  head  ere  give  consent. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4-41. 


CONJUNCTIONS.  77 

After  "such:" 

"  Yet  suck  deceit  as  thou  that  dost  beguile 
Art  juster  far." — Sonn. 

This  occurs  less  commonly  without  the  antecedent  so  : 
"  My  lord,  I  warrant  you  we'll  play  our  part 
As  he  shall  think  by  our  true  diligence 
He  is  no  less  than  what  we  say  he  is." — T.  of  Sh.  Ind.  i.  68. 
This  points  out  an  important  difference  between  the  Elizabethan 
and  modern  uses  of  as.    We  almost  always  apply  it,  like  "because" 
(117),  to  the  past  and  the  present ;  Shakespeare  often  uses  it  of  the 
future,  in  the  sense  of  "according  as." 

"And,  sister,  as  the  winds  give  benefit 
And  convoy  is  assistant,  do  not  sleep, 
But  let  me  hear  from  you. " — Hamlet,  i.  3.  2. 

Here  a  modem  reader  would  at  first  naturally  suppose  as  to  mean 
"since"  or  "because;"  but  the  context  shows  that  it  means 
"according  as." 

110.  As,  in  its  demonstrative  meaning  of  so,  is  occasionally  found 
parenthetically  =  "for  so." 

"  This  Jacob  from  our  holy  Abraham  was 
(As*  his  wise  mother  wrought  in  his  behalf) 
The  third  possessor." — M.  ofV.'i.^.  73. 
"  Who  dares  receive  it  other — 
As  we  shall  make  our  griefs  and  clamours  roar 
Upon  his  death?"— Macb.  i.  7.  78. 

i.e.  "  so  did  his  mother  work ;"  "  so  will  we  make  our  griefs  roar." 

"  The  fixure  of  her  eye  has  motion  in  't, 
As  we  are  mock'd  with  art." — W.  T.  v.  3.  68. 

Fhere  seems  some  confusion  in  the  difficult  passage 

"Speak  truly,  on  thy  knighthood  and  thy  oath, 
As  so  defend  thee  heaven  and  thy  valour." 

Rich.  II.  i.  3.  15. 

In  the  similar  line  34  as  is  omitted.  This  would  lead  us  to  con- 
jecture "and."  But  perhaps  the  marshal  was  beginning  to  say 
"speak  truly  as  may  heaven  defend  thee,"  but  diverged  into  the 
more  ordinary  "so,"  which  was  the  customary  mode  of  invocation. 
In  that  case  the  meaning  will  be  "as  thou  wouldst  desire  the 
fulfilment  of  thy  prayer,  ' so  help  me  heaven.'" 

Comp.   olov  efaprytra.  fapov  fnfj.flv. — /EscH.  Prntn.   I'inct.  908. 


yS  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So  in 

"Duke.   If  this  be  so  (as,  yet,  the  glass  seems  Iruei 
I  shall  have  share  in  this  most  happy  wreck. " 

T.  //.  v.  i.  272. 

The  Duke  has  called  the  appearance  of  the  twins  "a  natural  per- 
spective that  is  and  is  not"  (ib.  224),  i.e.  a  glass  that  produces  an 
optical  delusion  of  two  persons  instead  of  one.  He  now  says  :  "n 
they  are  two,  brother  and  sister  (and  indeed,  spite  of  my  incredulity, 
the  perspective  or  glass  seems  to  be  no  delusion),  then  I  shall,"  &c. 
The  curious  introduction  of  the  "wreck"  suggests  that  the  glass 
called  up  the  thought  of  the  "pilot's  glass."  (M.  for  M.  ii.  I.  168.) 
An  ellipsis  must  be  supplied  in 

"  Had  I  but  time  (which  I  have  not) — as  this  fell  sergeant, 

Death, 
Is  strict  in  his  arrest." — Hamlet,  v.  2.  347. 

111.  As  =  "as  regards  which,"  "though,"  "for,"  was  some- 
times used  parenthetically  in  a  sense  oscillating  between  the  relative 
"which,"     "as    regards    which,"     and     the    conjunction    "for," 
"  though,"  "since."     It  is  used  as  a  relative  in 

"  But  say  or  he  or  we,  (as  neither  have  [pi.  see  12,  Neither],) 
Received  that  sum."— L.  L.  L.  ii.  I.  133. 

As  is  used  in  a  transitional  manner  for  "as  regards  which"  or 
"  for  indeed,"  in 

"Though  I  die  for  it,  as  no  less  is  threatened  me." 

Lear,  iii.  3.  19. 
"When  I  was  young,  as,  yet,  I  am  not  old." 

I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  4.  17. 
"  If  you  will  patch  a  quarrel 
As  matter  whole  you've  not  to  make  it  with." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  I.  53. 

Here  in  the  second  example,  "When  I  was  young  as  I  yet,  or 
still,  am,"  would  have  retained  the  relatival  signification  of  as,  but 
the  addition  of  "  not  old"  obliges  us  to  give  to  as  the  meaning  not 
of  "  which,"  but  "as  regards  which"  or  "  for."     So  in 
"  She  dying,  as  it  must  be  so  maintained." 

M.  Ado,  iv.  I.  216. 

112.  As,  owing  to  its  relatival  signification,  is  sometimes  loosely 
used  for  "which."     This  is  still  usual  with  us,  but  rarely  except 
when  preceded  by  "  such  "  or  "  the  same." 


CONJUNCTIONS.  79 

"  That  gentleness  as  I  was  wont  to  have." — J.  C.  i.  2.  33. 
"  Under  these  hard  conditions  as  this  time 
Is  like  to  lay  upon  us."— y.  C.  i.  2.  174. 

This  is  still  common  in  provincial  language.     See  280. 
As  is  used  for  "  where  "  in 

"  Here  as  I  point  my  sword  the  sun  arises." — J.  C.  ii.  I.  106. 

113.  As  is  frequently  used  (without  such)  to  signify  "namely  :" 
"  And  that  which  should  accompany  old  age, 

As  honour,  love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends." 

Macb.  v.  3.  25. 

"  Tired  with  all  these  for  restful  death  I  cry, 
As  to  behold  desert  a  beggar  born 
And  needy  nothing  trimm'd  in  jollity 
And,  &c." — Sonn.  66.  4 

So  C.  ofE.  i.  2.  98  ;  Hcii.  VIII.  iv.  i.  88  ;  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  109. 
"Two  Cliffords,  as  the  father  and  the  son." 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  7.  7. 

So  A.  Y.  L.  ii.  I.  6  ;  Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  18  ;  and  Hamlet,  i.  I.  117, 
where  however  a  line  has  jfrobably  dropped  out  between  116 
and  117. 

114.  As  is  apparently  used  redundantly  with  definitions  of  time 
(as  is  is  used  in  Greek  with   respect  to  motion).     It  is  said  by 
Halliwell  to  be  an  Eastern  Counties'  phrase  : 

"This  is  my  birth-day,  as  this  very  day 

Was  Cassius  born."—  J.  C.  v.  I.  72. 

"One  Lucio  as  then  the  messenger." — M.  for  M.  v.  I.  74. 
The  as  in  the  first  example  may  be  intended  to  qualify  the  state- 
ment that  Cassius  was  bom  on  "  this  very  clay,"  which  is  not 
literally  true,  as  meaning  "as  I  may  say."  Here,  and  in  our  Collect 
for  Christmas  Day,  "  as  at  this  time  to  be  born,"  as  seems  appro- 
priate to  an  anniversary.  In  the  second  example  the  meaning  of 
"as  then"  is  not  so  clear;  perhaps  it  means  "  as  far  as  regards  that 
occasion."  Compare 

"  Yet  God  at  last 

To  Satan,  first  in  sin,  his  doom  applied, 
Though  in  mysterious  terms,  judg'd  as  then  best." 

MILTON,  P.  L.  x.  173. 

where  "as  then"  seems  to  mean  "for  the  present."  So  "as  yet  " 
means  "as  far  as  regards  time  up  to  the  present  time."  So  in 


8o  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

German  " ah  dann"  means  "then,"  and  "als"  is  applied  to  other 
temporal  adverbs. 

As  in  E.  E.  was  often  prefixed  to  dates  : 
"  As  in  the  year  of  grace,"  &c. 

"As  now  "is  often  used  in  Chaucer  and  earlier  writers  for  "as 
regards  now,"  "for  the  present :" 

"  But  al  that  thing  I  must  as  now  forbere." 

CHAUC.  Knighted  Tale,  27. 
In         "  Meantime  I  writ  to  Romeo 

That  he  should  hither  come  as  this  dire  night," 

R.  and  J.  v.  3.  247. 
as  perhaps  means  "as  (he  did  come)." 

115.  As  was  used  almost  but  not  quite  redundantly  after  "seem" 
(as  it  is  still,  after  "regard,"  "represent")  : 

"  To  prey  on  nothing  that  doth  seem  as  dead." 

A.  Y.  L.  iv.  3.  119. 
and  even  after  "am:" 

"  I  am  but  as  a  guiltless  messenger." — A.  Y.  L.  iv.  3.  12. 
"  I  am  here  in  the  character  of"  &c. 

As  is  also  used  nearly  redundantly  before  participles  to  denote 
a  cause,  "inasmuch  as  :" 

"If  he  be  now  retuni'd 
As  checking  at  his  voyage." — Hamlet,  iv.  7-  63. 

116.  As,  like  "  that "  (see  287),  is  used  as  a  conjunctional  suffix  : 
sometimes  being  superfluously  added  to  words  that  are  already  con- 
junctions.    In  the   case  of   "when  as,"   "where  as,"  it  may  be 
explained  from  a  desire  to  give  a  relative  meaning  to  words  interro- 
gative by  nature  : 

"  (I  am)  one  that  was  a  woeful  looker-on 
When  as  the  noble  duke  of  York  was  slain." 

3  Hen.   VI.  ii.  I.  46  ;  i.  2.  75. 
So        "  Whereas."— 2  Hen.   VI.  i.  2.  58,  for  "where." 

117.  Because  ("for  this  reason  that")  refers  to  \hzfntiire instead 
of,  as  with  us,  to  the  past,  in 

1  The  splitting  rocks  cower'd  in  the  sinking  sands 
And  would  not  dash  me  with  their  rugged  sides, 
Because  thy  flinty  heart,  more  hard  than  they, 
Might  in  thy  palace  perish  (act.  291),  Margaret." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  100. 


CONJUNCTIONS.  Si 

i.e.    "«'«   order  tfiat  thy  flinty  heart   might  have  the  privilege  of 
destroying  me." 

118.  But  (E.  E.  and  modern  northern  English  "bout")  is  in 
Old  Saxon  "bi-utan,"  where  "bi"  is  our  modern  "by,"  and 
"man "  means  "  without."  Thus  but  is  a  contraction  for  "by-out," 
and  is  formed  exactly  like  "with-out."  Hence  but  means  excepted 
or  excepting.  This  use  of  out  in  compounds  may  be  illustrated  by 
"  outstep  (except)  the  king  be  miserable."* 

"  It  was  full  of  scorpyones  and  cocadrilles  out-takenc  in  the  fore- 
said  monethes."* 

"  Alle  that  y  have  y  grant  the,  out-take  my  wyfe."  * 
The  two  latter  passages  illustrate  the  difficulty  of  determining 
whether  but  is  used  as  a  passive  participle  with  nominative  absolute, 
or  as  an  active  participle  with  the  objective  case.  In  the  same  way 
we  find  "  excepted  "  and  "  except "  placed  (a)  after  a  noun  or  pronoun, 
apparently  as  passive  participles,  and  (£)  before,  as  prepositions. 
Thus— 

(rt)     "  Only  you  excepted."— M.  Ado,  i.  I.  126. 
"  Richard  except."— Rich.  III.  v.  3.  242. 
Then,  on  the  other  hand, — 

(b)     "  Always  excepted  my  dear  Claudio. " — M.  Ado,  iii.  I.  93. 

"  Except  immortal  Caesar."— y.  C.  i.  2.  60. 
(For  the  confusion  between  "except"  and  "excepted"  compare 
"  deject "  for  "  dejected,"  &c.     See  below,  342. ) 

The  absence  of  inflections,  however,  in  the  above  instances  leaves 
us  uncertain  whether  "except"  is  a  preposition  or  participle.  But 
"save"  seems  to  be  used  for  "saved"  and  "he"  to  be  the 
nominative  absolute  in 

"All  the  conspirators  save  only  he."  t — y.  C.  v.  5.  69. 
So     ".Saz^thou."—  Sonn.  109. 

"Nor  never  none 

Shall  mistress  be  of  it  save  I  alone." — T.  Ar.  iii.  I.  172. 
"What  stays  had  I  but  i\\ey."—Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  76,  iv.  4.  34  ; 
Cymb.  ii.  3.  153;  Macbeth,  iii.  I.  54  ;  R.  and  J.  i.  2.  14. 
On  the  other  hand,  Shakespeare  does  not  agree  with  modern  usage 
in  the  inflections  of  the  pronouns  (see  206 — 216). 

*  Halliwell's  Dictionary. 

t  Similarly  "sauf"  was  used  in  French  in  agreement  with  a  noun  placed  in 
the  nominative  absolute. 

G 


Sz  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

119.  But  is  almost  always  used  in  Layamon  for  "unless"  or 
"without"  (prep.),  or  "without"  (adv.)  in  the  sense  of  "outside." 
Thus  (i.    159):   "that  a  queen  should  be  king  in   this  land  and 
their   sons    be    buten,"    (1.   t    boute),   i.e.    "without  (the    land)." 
So  (i.  215)  "buten  laeve,"i.e.  "  without  leave."     It  occurs  adversa- 
tively  in  (i.  353)  a  passage  which  illustrates  the  transition,  "If  thou 
wilt  receive  his  reconciliation,  it  will  be  well ;  but,  he  will  never 
deliver  Evelin  to  thee."     Here  but  is  the  preposition  "without," 
used  adverbially  as  "otherwise." 

120.  But,  in  all  its  uses,  may  be  explained  from  the  meaning  of 
"out-take"  or  except.     It  is  sometimes  used  (like  and,  see  above)  to 
except  or  "out-take"  a  whole  clause,  the  verb  being  occasionally  in 
the  subjunctive. 

"And,  but  thou  love  me,  let  them  find  me  here." 

JR.  andj.  ii.  2.  76. 
i.e.  "except  or  without  thou  love  me." 

"And,  but  I  be  deceived,  Signior  Baptista  may  remember 
me."— T:  ofSh.  iv.  2.  2. 

Compare  I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  34  :  "Except  I  be  provoked." 

So        ' '  Not  without  the  prince  be  willing. " — M.  Ado,  iii.  3.  86. 

We  now  use  "unless"  in  this  sense,  and  by  a  comparison  of 
Wickliffe  with  Tyndale  and  Cranmer  it  will  be  seen  that  but  was 
already  often  superseded  by  "except." 

But  with  the  subjunctive  is,  however,  more  common  in  Early  than 
in  Elizabethan  English.     Sometimes  without  the  subjunctive — 
"  And,  but  she  spoke  it  dying,  I  would  not 

Believe  her  lips. " — Cymb.  v.  5.  41. 
"  And,  but  he's  something  stain'd 

With  grief  that's  beauty's  canker,  thou  might'st  call  him 
A  goodly  person." — Tempest,  i.  2.  414. 

"  The  common  executioner 
Falls  not  the  axe  upon  the  humbled  neck 
But  first  begs  pardon." — A.  Y.  L.  iii.  5.  5. 
"  And,  but  infirmity  hath  something  seized 
His  wish'd  ability,  he  had  himself 
The  lands  and  waters  'twixt  your  throne  and  his 
Measured,  to  look  upon  you."—  W.  T.v.l.  141. 

121.  But.    Transition  of  meaning.    These  last  passages 
illustrate  the  transition  of  but  from  except  to  "on  the  contrary," 


CONJUNCTIONS.  83 

"byway  of  prevention."  The  transition  is  natural,  inasmuch  as 
an  exception  may  well  be  called  contrary  to  the  rule.  The  first 
passage  «s  a  blending  of  two.  constructions  :"if  she  had  not  spoken 
it  dying  I  would  not  believe,"  and  "  I  would  not  believe,  but  she 
spoke  it  dying."  Similarly :  "Except  infirmity  had  seized — he  had 
(would  have)  measured,"  and  "  He  had  (would  have)  measured, 
but  (by  way  of  prevention)  infirmity  hath  seized. " 

The  different  usages  of  but  arise,  (i)  from  its  variations  between 
the  meaning  of  "except,"  "unless,  "and  the  adversative  meaning 
"  on  the  other  hand ;"  (2)  from  the  fact  that  the  negative  before  but, 
in  the  sense  of  "except,"  is  sometimes  omitted  and  at  other  times 
inserted.  Thus  "but  ten  came"  may  mean  "ten  however  came," 
or  "  (none)  but  ten,  i.e.  only  ten,  came."  But  is  now  much  more 
confined  than  it  was,  to  its  adversative  meaning.  We  still  say  "it 
never  rains  but  it  pours  "  (where  the  subject  is  the  same  before  and 
after  but) ;  and,  even  where  a  new  subject  is  introduced,  we  might 
say,  "  I  did  not  know  but  you  had  come,"  "  You  shall  not  persuade 
me  but  you  knew,"  &c. ;  but  this  use  is  colloquial,  and  limited  to  a 
few  common  verbs.  We  should  scarcely  write 

"  I  never  saw  but  Humphrey  duke  of  Gloucester 
Did  bear  him  like  a  noble  gentleman."— 2  Hen.  VI.  \.  I.  83. 

122.  "  But "  signifying  prevention.    The  following  passages 

illustrate  the  "preventive"  meaning  of  but: 

"  Have  you  no  countermand  for  Claudio  yet 
But  he  must  die  to-morrow?" — M.forM.  iv.  2.  97. 

i.e.  "to  prevent  that  he  must  die."     If  "but"  were  the  ordinary 
adversative,  it  would  be  "  but  must  he  die?" 

"  That  song  to-night 

Will  not  go  from  my  mind :  I  have  much  to  do 
But  (to  prevent  myself)  to  go  hang  my  head  all  at  one  side 
And  sing  it,  like  poor  Barbara." — Othello^  iv.  3.  32. 
"Have  you  no  wit,  manners,  nor  honesty  but  to  gabble   like 
tinkers  at  this  time  of  night?" — T.  N.  ii.  3.  95. 

i.e.    "to  prevent  you  from  gabbling,"  or,  as  Shakespeare  «ould 
write,  "to  gabble."     866349. 

After  verbs  of   "denying"  and   "doubting"   which   convey   a 
notion  of  hindrance,  but  is  often  thus  used  : 

"  I  doubt  not  but  to  ride  as  fast  as  York." — Rich.  II.  ii.  5.  2. 
"  I  have  no  doubt  (i.e.  fear)  about  being  prevented  from  riding.' 
G  2 


84  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So  I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  2.  14  : 

"  It  must  not  be  denied  but  I  am  a  plain  dealing  villain." 

M.  Ado,  i.  3.  32. 

"  There  must  be  no  denial  to  prevent  my  being  supposed  a  plain- 
dealing  villain. "  In  the  last  passage,  however,  but  is  used  transi- 
tionally,  almost  as  an  adversative.  Compare 

"It  cannot  be  but  I  am  pigeon-livered, " — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  605. 
which  approximates  to  "It  cannot  be  (that  I  am  otherwise  than  a 
coward),"  i.e.  "it  cannot  be  that  I  am  courageous  ;  on  the  contrary 
(but  adversative),  I  am  pigeon-liver'd. " 

The  variable  nature  of  but  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  "believe 
not  but,"  and  "  doubt  not  but,"  are  used  in  the  same  signification  : 

"  We  doubt  not  but  every  rub  is  smoothed." — Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  187. 
i.e.  "we  have  no  doubt  of  a  nature  to  prevent  our  believing  that," 
&c.  So  Rich.  II.  v.  2.  115.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 

"  I'll  not  believe  but  they  ascend  the  sky."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  287. 

i.e.  "I'll  not  believe  anything  except  (or  'otherwise  than')  that  they 
ascend. " 

In  the  first  of  these  passages  but  is  semi-adversative. 

"  She  is  not  so  divine 
But  with  as  humble  lowliness  of  mind 

She  is  content  to  be  at  your  command." — I  Hen.  VI.  v.  5.  18. 
i.e.  "not  so  divine  as  to  prevent  that  she  should  be  content." 
"  But "  and  "  but  that "  are  still  thus  used. 

123.  But  (in  phrases  like  "  there  is  no  man  but  hates  me,"  where 
a  subject  immediately  precedes  but}  often  expels  the  subject  from 
the  following  relative  clause.  This  perhaps  arose  in  part  from  a 
reluctance  to  repeat  a  subject  which  was  already  emphatically  ex- 
pressed. See  244.  For  the  same  reason  the  relative  is  omitted  in 
such  expressions  as 

"There  is  no  creature  loves  me."— Rich.  III.  v.  3.  200. 
In  such  cases  we  still  sometimes  omit  the  subject,  but  perhaps  not 
often  where  but  is  separated  from  the  preceding  subject,  as  in 
"  There  is  no  vice  so  simple  but  assumes 
Some  mark  of  virtue  in  its  outward  parts." 

M.ofV.  iii.  2.  81. 
On  the  other  hand,  this  omission  is  not  found  in  the  earliest  stages 


CONJUNCTIONS.  85 

of  the  language  (Matzner,  iii.  p.  469),  and  thus  we  find  the  subject 
frequently  retained  in  Shakespeare  : 

"  I  found  no  man  but  he  was  true  to  me." — J.  C.  v.  5.  35. 

"  There's  ne'er  a  villain  dwelling  in  all  Denmark 
But  he's  an  arrant  knave." — Hamlet,  i.  5.  124. 

Less  frequently  but  expels  the  object  in  the  relative  clause  : 

"  No  jocund  health  that  Denmark  drinks  to-day 
But  the  great  cannon  to  the  clouds  shall  tell." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  126. 

124.  But  meaning  except  may  apply  to  an  expressed  contingency, 
as  (1) 

"  God  defend  but  I  should  still  be  so."— i  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  38. 
i.e.  "  God  forbid  everything  except  (I  should,  &c.)  " 

"  But  being  charged  we  will  be  still  by  land." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  1 1.  1. 

i.e.  "  Excepting  the  supposition  of  our  being  charged." 
(2)  Sometimes  the  contingency  is  merely  implied. 

"  I  should  sin 
To  think  but  (except  I  should  think)  nobly  of  my  grandmother." 

Temp.  i.  2.  119. 
"  Her  head's  declined  and  death  will  seize  her,  but 

Your  comfort  makes  her  rescue." — A.  and  C.  iii.  II.  48. 
i.e.  "only  your  comfort." 

The  last  passage  illustrates  the  connection  between  but  meaning 
only,  and  but  used  adversatively. 

125.  But  thus  varying  between  an  adversative  and  an  exceptional 
force  causes  many  ambiguities.     Thus : 

'  Whenever  Buckingham  doth  turn  his  hate 
On  you  and  yours,  but  with  all  duteous  love 
Doth  cherish  you  and  yours,  God  punish  me. " 

Rich.  III.  ii.  i.  33. 

Here  but  means  "without,"  or  "instead  of,  cherishing  you." 
"  You  salute  not  at  the  court  but  you  kiss  your  hands." 

A.  Y.  L.  iii.  i.  50. 
i.e.  "without  kissing  your  hands." 

126.  But  is  not  adversative,  but  means  "if  not,"  after  "beshrewr 
me,"  &c. : 


86  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Beshrew  my  soul  but  I  do  love,"  &c.—  K.  J.  v.  4.  51. 
So  3  Hen.  VI.  \.  4.  150. 

"  The  Gods  rebuke  me  but  it  is  tidings 
To  wash  the  eyes  of  kings."— A.  and  C.  v.  I.  27;  ib.  103. 

Thus  we  explain : 

"  I'll  plead  for  you  myself  but  you  shall  have  him." 

T.  ofSh.  ii.  i.  15. 

i.e.  "  I'll  plead  for  you  myself //you  shall  not  have  him  otherwise  ;" 
but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  above  construction  may  be  confused 
with  "  I  may  have  to  plead  for  you  myself,  but  (adversative)  in  any 
case  you  shall  have  him. "  So 

"I  should  woo  hard  but  be  your  groom," — Cymb.  iii.  6.  70. 

i*,  perhaps,  a  confusion  between  "  if  I  could  not  be  your  groom 
otnerwise  "  and  "  but  in  any  case  I  would  be  your  groom."  In  the 
last  example,  however,  it  is  possible  that  there  is  an  additional  con- 
fusion arising  from  the  phrase  :  "  It  would  go  hard  with  me  but." 

127.    But  in  the  sense  of  except  frequently  follows  negative 
comparatives,  where  we  should  use  than. 

"No  more  but  instruments."— M.  for  M.  v.  I.  237. 

Here  two  constructions  are  blended,  "  Nothing  except  instruments" 
and  ' '  only  instruments ;  no  more. "     So — 

"  No  more  dreadfully  but  as  a.  drunken  sleep." 

M.forM.  iv.  2.  150. 
' '  The  which  no  sooner  had  his  prowess  confirm'd, 

But  like  a  man  he  died."— Macbeth,  v.  8.  42. 
"  I  think  it  be  no  other  but  even  so."— Hamlet,  i.  I.  108. 
"No  more  tut  that."— A.  W.  iii.  7.  30. 
"With  no  worse  nor  better  guard  but  with  a  knave." 

Othello,  i.  i.  126. 
"Thou  knowest  no  less  but  all."— 71  N.  i.  4.  13. 

Sometimes  but  follows  an  adjective   qualified  by  the  negative 
with  "so." 

"Not  so  dull  but  she  can  learn."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  164. 
So  Chaucer  : 

"  I  «am  but  dede,"— Knight e's  Tale. 
where,  omitting  the  negative  n,  we  should  say  "  I  am  but  dead.'r 


CONJUNCTIONS.  87 

128.  But  passes  naturally  from  "except"  to  "only,"  when  the 
negative  is  omitted.  ("No-but"  or  "nobbut"  is  still  used  pro- 
vincially  for  "  only.")  Thus  : 

"  No  more  but  that,"— A.  W.  iii.  7.  30. 
becomes  "/Wthat." 

"  Glouc.  What,  and  wouldst  climb  a  tree  ? 
Simple.  But  that  in  all  my  life."— 2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  I.  90. 

i.e.  "no  more  but  that  one  tree,"  or  "only  that  one  tree." 

"  Cleo.  Antony  will  be  himself. 
Ant.  But  stirr'd  by  Cleopatra." — A.  and  C.  i.  I.  142. 

i.e.  "not  except  stirr'd,"  "only  if  stirr'd." 

"But  sea-room,  and  (if  ¥o\.)  the  brine  and  billow  kiss  the 
moon,  I  care  not."—/',  of  T.  iii.  I.  45. 

"  Where  Brutus  may  but  find  it." — J.  C.  i.  3.  140. 
i.e.  "Where  Brutus  can  (do  nothing)  but  find  it,"  i.e.,  as  we  say, 
"cannot   but  find   it."     Possibly,  however,  but  (see  129)  may  be 
transposed,  and  the  meaning  may  be  "Brutus  only,"*'.*.  "Brutus 
alone  may  find  it." 

"  He  that  shall  speak  for  her  is  afar  off  guilty 
But  that  he  speaks."—^.  T.  it  I.  105. 

i.e.  "  simply  in  that  he  speaks,"  "  merely  for  speaking." 
The  effect  of  the  negative  on  but  is  illustrated  by 

"  But  on  this  day  let  seamen  fear  no  wreck." — K.  J.  iii.  I.  92. 

Here,  at  first,  but  might  seem  to  mean  "only,"  but  the  subsequent 
negative  gives  it  the  force  of  "  except." 
But  perhaps  means  "  only"  in 

"  He  boasts  himself 
To  have  a  worthy  feeding  :  but  I  have  it 
Upon  his  own  report,  and  I  believe  it." — W.  T.  iv.  4.  168. 

i.e.  "  I  have  it  merely  on  his  own  report,  and  I  believe  it  too." 
There  is,  perhaps,  a  studied  ambiguity  in  the  reply  of  Hamlet : 

"  Guild.  What  should  we  say,  my  lord  ? 
Hamlet.  Anything  but  to  the  purpose. " — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  287. 

The  ellipsis  of  the  negative  explains  "neither"  in  the  following 
difficult  passage  : 

"  To  divide  him  inventorily  would  dizzy  the  authentic  of  memory 
and  yet  but  yaw  neither  (i.e.  do  nothing  but  lag  clumsily  behind 
neither)  in  respect  of  his  quick  sail." — Hamlet,  v.  2.  120. 


88  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Neither"  for  our  "either"  is  in  Shakespeare's  manner,  after 
a  negative  expressed  or  implied. 
But  means  "  setting  aside"  in 

"  What  would  my  lord,  but  that  (which)  he  may  not  have, 
Wherein  Olivia  may  seem  serviceable." — T.  N.  v.  I.  104. 

Such  instances  as  this,  where  but  follows  not  a  negative  but  a 
superlative,  are  rare  : 

"Pistol.   Sweet  knight,  thou  art  now  one  of  the  greatest  men  in 
this  realm. 

Silent.  By 're  lady,  I  think  'a  be,  but  goodman  Puff  of  Barson. " 

2  Hen.  IV.  v.  3.  93. 
But  seems  used  for  "  but  now"  in 

"No  wink,  sir,  all  this  night, 
Nor  yesterday  :  but  (but  now)  slumbers." — B.  J.  Fox,  i.  I. 

129.  But  (like  excepled  and  except}  varies  in  its  position.     Simi- 
larly  "only"  varies  with  us:    we  can  say  either   "one  only"  or 
"only  one." 

"This  very  morning  but." — B.  J.  Sad Sh.  ii.  2. 
i.e.  "  only  this  morning." 

"Where  one  but  goes  abreast" — Tr.  and  Cr.  Hi.  3.  155. 
for  "  but  one"  or  "  one  only" 

"Eut'm  these  fields  of  late."— TV.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  188. 
for  "but  of  late." 

"  A  summer's  day  will  seem  an  hour  but  short." —  V.  and  A. 
"Betwixt  them  both  but  was  a  little  stride." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  ii.  7.  24. 

•  "And  when  you  saw  his  chariot  but  appear."— ?!  C.  i.  I.  48. 
i.e.  "  his  chariot  merely"  or  "but  his  chariot." 

"Your  oaths  are  words  and  poor  conditions  but  unseal'd." 

A.  W.  iv.  2.  30. 
i.e.  "merely  unsealed  agreements." 

130.  The  same  forgetfulness  of  the  original  meaning  of  words 
which  led  to  "more  better,"  &c.,  led  also  to  the  redundant  use  of 
but  In  "  but  only,"  "  merely  but"  "  but  even,"  &c. 

"Merely  out  art."— L.  C.  25. 

11  He  only  lived  but  till  he  was  a  man."— Macbeth,  v.  8.  40. 


CONJUNCTIONS.  89 

"My  lord,  your  son  had  only  but  the  corpse." 

2  Hen.  IV.\.  I.  192. 
"  Even  but  now  "  for  "  but  now." 

M.  of  V.  v.  i.  272;  A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  3. 

"  But  a  very  prey  to  woe."— -tfwvfc.  III.  iv.  4.  106. 

"Augustus, 

In  the  bestowing  of  his  daughter,  thought 
But  even  of  gentlemen  of  Rome. " — B.  J.  Sejan.  iii.  2. 

Probably  like  "merely  but."' 

So        "  Even  just.  "—Heii.  V.  ii.  3.  12. 

"But  now,"  like  "even  now"  (38),  is  capable  of  different  mean- 
ings :  "a  moment  ago"  and  "at  the  present  moment." 

"  But  now  I  was  the  lord 
Of  this  fair  mansion,  and  even  now,  but  now 
This  house,  these  servants,  and  this  same  myself 
Are  yours."— M.  of  V.  iil  2.  171. 

For.     See  151. 

131.  Or  (before).  Or  in  this  sense  is  a  corruption  of  A.-S.  or 
(Eng.  ere),  which  is  found  in  Early  English  in  the  forms  er,  air, 
ar,  ear,  or,  eror. 

"  Or  (before)  he  have  construed." — ASCH.  95. 

As  this  meaning  of  or  died  out,  it  seems  to  have  been  combined 
with  ere  for  the  sake  of  emphasis.  Thus  : 

"  Dying  or  ere  they  sicken." — Macbeth,  iv.  3.  173  ; 

K.  J.  v.  6.  44 ;  Temp.  v.  i.  103. 

We  find  in  E.  E.  "erst  er,"  "bifore  er,"  "before  or"  (Matzner, 
iii.  451). 

Another  explanation  might  be  given.  Ere  has  been  conjectured 
to  be  a  corruption  of  eer,  ever,  and  "or  ever"  an  emphatic  form 
like  "whenever,"  "wherever."  "Ever"  is  written  "ere"  in 
Sonn.  93,  133.  And  compare  "Or  ever  your  pots  be  made  hot  with 
thorns." — Ps.  Iviii. 

Against  the  latter  explanation  is  the  fact  that  "ever"  is  much 
more  common  than  "ere."  It  is  much  more  likely  that  "ever" 
should  be  substituted  for  "ere"  than  "ere"  for  "ever."  For 

Or  ...  or,  see  136. 


9o  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

132.  Since*  seems  used  for  when  in— 

"  Beseech  you,  sir, 

Remember  since  you  owed  no  more  to  time 
Than  I  do  now."—  W.  T.  v.  i.  219. 
"  Remember  the  time  past  -when  you,"  &c. 

"  We  know  the  time  since  he  was  mild  and  affable." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  9. 
"  Thou  rememberest 
Since  once  I  sat  upon  a  promontory." — M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  149. 

"This  fellow  I  remember 
Since  once  he  play'd  a  farmer's  eldest  son." 

T.  ofSh.  Ind.  i.  84. 
So  2  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  206. 

This  meaning  of  since  arises  from  the  omission  of  "it  is"  in  such 
phrases  as  "  it  is  long  since  I  saw  you,"  when  condensed  into  "long 
since,  I  saw  you."  Thus  since  acquires  the  meaning  of  "ago,"  "in 
past  time,"  adverbially,  and  hence  is  used  conjunctively  for  "  when, 
long  ago." 

Since  (like  the  adverb)  is  found  connected  with  a  simple  present 
where  we  use  the  complete  present  (so  in  Latin)  : 

"  Since  the  youth  of  the  count  was  to-day  with  my  lady,  she  is 
much  out  of  quiet." — T.  N.  ii.  3.  144. 

More  remarkable  is  the  use  of  the  simple  past  for  the  complete 
present  : 

"  I  was  not  angry  since  I  came  to  France 
Until  this  instant." — Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  58. 

Note  "Whip  him  .  .  . 

So  saucy  with  the  hand  of  she  here, — what's  her  name? 
Since  she  was  Cleopatra." — A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  99. 

Perhaps  the  meaning  is  "  Whip  him  for  being  saucy  with  this 
woman,  since  (though  she  is  not  now  worthy  of  the  name)  she 
once  was  (emphatical)  Cleopatra."  Else  "What  is  her  new  name 
since  she  ceased  to  be  Cleopatra  ?"  If  since,  in  the  sense  of  "  ago," 
could  be  used  absolutely  for  "once,"  a  third  interpretation  would 
be  possible  :  "  What's  her  name  ?  Once  she  was  Cleopatra. " 

The  old  form  sith  occurs  several  times  in  Shakespeare,  and  mostly  in  Lie 
metaphorical  meaning  "because."  SitA  in  Hamlet,  ii.  2.  12,  is  an  exception. 
Sith  in  A.(-S.  meant  "late,"  "later;"  "  sith-than"  "after  that."  Sitktttfi 
(Chaucer,  "sethcns,"  "sins")  is  found  once  in  Shakespeare. 


CONJUNCTIONS.  91 

133.  So  is  used  with  the  future  and  the  subjunctive  to  denote 
"provided  that." 

"  I  am  content  so  thou  wilt  have  it  so."— R.  andj.  iii.  5.  18. 
"  So  it  be  new,  there's  no  respect  how  vile." — Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  25. 
So  seems  to  mean  "  in  this  way,"  "on  these  terms,"  and  the  full 
construction  is  "be  it  (if  it  be)  so  that."     "Be  it"  is  inserted  in 

"Be  it  so  (that)  she  will  not."— M.  N.  D.  i.  i.  39. 
"  That"  is  inserted  in  Chaucer,  Piers  Ploughman,  &c. 

"(Be  it)  So  that  ye  be  not  wrath."— CHAUCER,  C.  T.  7830. 
means  "  provided  you  will  not  be  angry."     So 

"  Poor  queen  !     So  that  thy  state  might  be  no  worse 
I  would  my  skill  were  subject  to  thy  curse. " 

Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  102. 

So,  thus  meaning  "on  condition  that,"  is  sometimes  used  where 
the  context  implies  the  addition  of  "even." 

"     Messenger.  Should  I  lie,  madam? 

Cleopatra.  O,  I  would  thou  didst 

So  (even  if)  half  my  Egypt  were  submerged." — A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  94. 

Sometimes  the  subjunctive  inflection  is  neglected  and  "so  as"  is 
used  for  "so  that." 

"So  as  thou  livest  in  peace,  die  free  from  strife." 

Rich.  II.  v.  5.  27. 

We  must  distinguish  the  conditional  "so  heaven  help  me"  from 
the  optative  " so  defend  thee  heaven"  (Rich.  II.  i.  3.  34),  where  the 
order  of  the  words  indicates  that  "  be  it .  .  .  that"  cannot  be  under- 
stood. Here  so  means  "on  the  condition  of  my  speaking  the  truth," 
and  is  not  connected  with  defend.  Compare  Rich.  III.  ii.  i.  11,  16. 
See  also  275-283. 

That.    See  Relative. 

That  omitted  before  the  subjunctive.     See  311. 

134.  Where  is  frequently  used  metaphorically  as  we  now  use 
whereas. 

"  It  (the  belly)  did  remain 
I'  the  midst  o'  the  body  idle  and  unactive 

where  the  other  instruments 

Did  see  and  hear,  devise,"  &c. — Coriol.  i.  I.  102. 

for  "whereas  the  other  instruments  did,"  &c.    Comp.  Coriol.  L  10.  13. 
So  Lear,  i.  2.  89  ;  Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  185. 


92  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

135.  Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  is  used  for  where  in 

"  Unto  St.  Alban's 
WJiereas  the  king  and  queen  do  mean  to  hawk. " 

2  Hen.   VI.  i.  2.  58. 

"  They  back  returned  to  the  princely  place  ; 
Whereas  .  .  .   a  knight  .   .  .   they  new  arrived  find." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  4.  38. 

So  " where-that. " — Hen.  V.  v.  Prologue,  17.  Probably  both  "as" 
and  "that"  were  added  to  give  a  relative  meaning  to  the  (originally) 
interrogative  adverb  "where.  See  287. 

136.  Whether  is  sometimes  used  after  "or"  where  we  should 
omit  one  of  the  two  : 

"  Or  whether  doth  my  mind,  being  crown'd  with  you, 
Drink  up  the  monarch's  plague,  this  flattery  ? 
Or  whether  shall  I  say  mine  eye  saith  true,"  &c. — Sonn.  1 14. 

"Move  those  eyes? 
Or  whether  riding  on  the  balls  of  mine 
Seem  they  in  motion?" — M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  18. 
"  Or  whether  his  fall  enraged  him,  or  how  it  was." 

Coriol.  i.  3.  69. 

The  first  example  is  perhaps  analogous  to  the  use  of  "  or  .  .  .  or," 
as  in 

"  Why  the  law  Salique  which  they  have  in  France 
Or  should  or  should  not  bar  us  in  our  claim. " 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  12  ;  T.  N.  iv.  I.  65. 

There  is,  perhaps,  a  disposition  to  revert  to  the  old  idiom  in 
which  the  two  particles  were  similar:  "other.  .  .  other."  (The 
contraction  of  "other"  into  "or"  is  illustrated  by  "whe'r"  for 
"  whether"  in  O.K.  and  the  Elizabethan  dramatists.)  Perhaps,  also, 
additional  emphasis  is  sought  by  combining  two  particles.  We 
find  "whether.  .  .  or  whether?"  to  express  direct  questions  in 
Anglo-Saxon.  In  the  second  example  a  previous  "whether"  is 
implied  in  the  words  "move  those  eyes?" 

137.  While    (originally  a    noun    meaning    "time").      Hence 
"  z-while"  "(for)  a  time;"  "the  while"  "(in)  the  (mean)  time;" 
"  whil-om. "  ( "  om  "  being  a  dative  plural  inflexion  used  adverbially), 
"at  a  (former)  time;"  " while-eve "  ( Temp.  iii.   2.  127),    "a  time 
before,"  i.e.  "  formerly." 

So  whiles  (genitive  of  while}  means  "of,  or  during,   the  time." 


93 

The  earliest  use  of  while  is  still  retained  in  the  modem  phrase  "all 
the  while  that  he  was  speaking."  "  The  while  that,"  from  a  very 
early  period,  is  used  in  the  condensed  form  "the  while"  or  "  while 
that"  or  while;  and  whiles  was  similarly  used  as  a  conjunc- 
tion. 

While  now  means  only  "during  the  time  when,"  but  in  Eliza- 
bethan English  both  while  and  whiles  meant  also  "up  to  the  time 
when."  (Compare  a  similar  use  of  "dum"in  Latin  and  e«s  in 
Greek.) 

"  We  will  keep  ourself 

Till  supper-time  alone.     While  (till)  then,  God  be  with  you. " 

Macbeth,  \\\.  I.  43. 
"I'll  trust  you  while  your  father's  dead." 

MASSINGER  (Nares). 
"  He  shall  conceal  it 
Whiles  you  are  willing  it  shall  come  to  note." — T.  N.  iv.  3.  28. 

"  Let  the  trumpets  sound 
While  we  return  these  dukes  what  we  decree. 

[A  long  flourish. 
Draw  near,  &.c."—Rich.  II.  i.  3.  122. 


PREPOSITIONS. 

138.  Prepositions  primarily  represent  local  relations ;  secondarily 
and  metaphorically,  agency,  cause,  &c.  A  preposition  (as  after,  see 
below)  may  be  used  metaphorically  in  one  age  and  literally  in  the 
next,  or  vice  versd.  This  gives  rise  to  many  changes  in  the  meaning 
ot  prepositions. 

The  shades  of  different  meaning  which  suggest  the  use  of  different 
prepositions  are  sometimes  almost  indistinguishable. 

We  say,  "a  canal  is  full  of  water."  There  is  no  reason  why  we 
should  not  also  say  "full  with  water,"  as  a  garden  is  "fair  with 
flowers."  Again,  ' '  a  canal  is  filled  with  water,"  the  verb  in  modern 
English  preferring  with  to  signify  instrumentality,  but  "filled  oj 
water  "  is  conceivable  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Shakespeare  does 
write  "furnished  of,  provided  of,  supplied  of"  for  with.  Lastly  the 
water  may  be  regarded  as  an  agent,  and  then  we  say,  "  the  canal  is 
filled  by  the  water."  But  an  action  may  be  regarded  as  "fl/"  the 
agent,  as  well  as  "by"  the  agent,  and  "of"  is  frequently  thus  used 
in  the  A.  V.  of  the  Bible  and  in  Elizabethan  authors,  as  well  as 


94  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

in  E.  E.  For  these  reasons  the  use  of  prepositions,  depending 
upon  the  fashion  of  metaphor  in  different  ages,  is  very  variable. 
It  would  be  hard  to  explain  why  we  still  say,  "I  live  on  bread," 
but  not  "  Or  have  we  eaten  on  the  insane  root  ?  "  (Macb.  i.  3.  84) ; 
as  hard  as  to  explain  why  we  talk  of  a  "high"  price  or  rate, 
while  Beaumont  and  Fletcher  speak  of  a  "  deeper  rate." 


139.  Prepositions:  modern  tendency  to  restrict  their 
meaning. 

One  .general  rule  may  be  laid  down,  that  the  meanings  of  the  pre- 
positions are  more  restricted  now  than  in  the  Elizabethan  authors  : 
partly  because  some  of  the  prepositions  have  been  pressed  into  the 
ranks  of  the  conjunctions,  e.g.  "for,"  "but,"  "after;"  partly 
because,  as  the  language  has  developed,  new  prepositional  ideas  having 
sprung  up  and  requiring  new  prepositional  words  to  express  them, 
the  number  of  prepositions  has  increased,  while  the  scope  of  each  has 
decreased.  Thus  many  of  the  meanings  of  "by "  have  been  divided 
among  "near,"  "in  accordance  with,"  "by  reason  of,"  "owing 
to;"  "but"  has  divided  some  of  its  provinces  among  "unless," 
"  except ;"  " for"  has  been  in  many  cases  supplanted  by  " because 
of,"  "as  regards  ;"  "  in"  by  "  during." 

140.  A.   Ben  Jonson  in  his  Grammar,   p.  785,  writes  thus  : — 
"  A  hath  also  the  force  of  governing  before  a  noun — '  And  the  Pro- 
tector had  layd  to  her  for  manner's  sake  that  she  was  a  council 
with  the  Lord  Hastings  to  destroy  him.' — Sir  T.  MORE." 

"  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  a  building." 

St.  John  ii.  20. 

The  present  text  is  in,  but  Cranmer  and  Tyndalehad  "0." 
This  a,  which  still  exists  in  alive,  afoot,  asleep,  &c.  is  a  contrac- 
tion of  A.-S.  on  or  the  less  common  form  an.     We  find  in  Early 
English  "on  live,"   "on  foot,"  "on  hunting,"  "on  sleep;"    "<i 
morrow  and  eke  an  eve,"  for  "  by  morning  and  also  by  evening  ;  " 
"a  land  and  a  water,"  Piers  PI.   (where  some  MSS.  have  on), 
"  a  (for  in)  God's  name,"  "  an  end  "  for  "  on  the  (at  the)  end." 
In  the  Folio  we  sometimes  find  a  where  we  write  o'  : 

"  What  is  't  a  clocke  V—Rich.  III.  v.  3.  47. 
See  Adverbs,  24 


PREPOSITIONS.  95 

141.  After  ("following,"  Latin  "secundum,"  hence  "according 
to"). 

"Say,  you  chose  him, 

More  after  our  commandment  than  as  guided 
By  your  own  true  affections." — Coriol.  ii.  3.  238. 
'  After  my  seeming."— 2  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  128. 

Compare  "Neither  reward  us  after  our  iniquities,"  in  our  Prayer- 
book. 

After  is  now  used  only  of  space  or  time,  except  in  "  after  the  pattern, 
example,  &c.,"  where  the  sense  requires  the  metaphorical  meaning. 

142.  Against  used  metaphorically  to  express  time.     This  is  now 
restricted  to  colloquial  language  : 

"I'll  charm  his  eyes  against  he  do  appear." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  99. 
i.e.   "against  the  time  that  he  do  appear."      Any  preposition,  as 
"for,"  "in,"  can  thus  be  converted  into  a  conjunction  by  affixing 
"  that,"  and  the  "that"  is  frequently  omitted. 
"  Against  (the  time  that)  my  love  shall  be  as  I  am  now." — Sonn.  63. 

"'Gainst  that  season  comes." — Hamlet,  i.  I.  158. 

"  As  against  the  doom. " — Ib.  iii.  3.  50. 
i.e.  "as  though  expecting  doom's-day." 

143.  At.     The  use  of  a  mentioned  in  140  was  becoming  unin- 
telligible and  vulgar  in  Shakespeare's  time,  and  he  generally  uses  at 
instead.     The  article   is  generally  omitted   in  the   following  and 
similar  adverbial  forms. 

"  All  greeting  that  a  king  at  friend  can  send  his  brother." 

W.  T.  v.  i.  140. 

"The  wind  at  help."— Hamlet,  iv.  3.  46. 
"  At  shore."— MONTAIGNE.     "  At  door."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  352. 
"  (A  ship)  that  lay  at  rode."—N.  P.  177. 
"As  true  a  dog  as  ever  fought  at  head."—T.  A.  v.  i.  102. 
"  Bring  me  but  out  at  gate" — Coriol.  iv.  i.  47. 
"  At  point"— Coriol.  v.  4.  64 ;  Cymb.  iii.  6.  17. 
But  "When  they  were  fallen  at  a  point  for  rendering  up  the  hold." 

HOLINSHED,  Duncane. 

The  at  of  price  generally  requires  an  adjective  or  article,  as  well 
as  a  noun,  after  it,  except  in  "at  all."     We  have,  however, 

"  If  my  love  thou  hold'st  at  aught"— Hamlet,  iv.  3.  60. 
i.e.  "at  a  whit" 


96  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

In  Early  English  at  does  not  seem  to  have  been  thus  extensively 
used.  It  then  was  mostly  used  (Stratmann)  in  the  sense  of  "  at  the 
hands  of"  (vp6s  with  gen.)  :  "I  ask  at,  take  leave  at,  learn  at  a 
person,"  &c. 

At  is  used  like  "near"  with  a  verb  of  motion  where  we  should 
use  "up  to  :" 

"  I  will  delve  one  yard  below  their  mines, 
And  blow  them  at  the  moon." — Hamlet,  iii.  4.  209. 

In     "  Follow  him  at  foot,"— Ib.  iv.  3.  56. 
at  is  not  "on"  but  "near,"  as  in  "at  his  heels." 

144,  At,  when  thus  used  in  adverbial  expressions,  now  rejects 
adjectives  and  genitives  as  interfering  with  adverbial  brevity.     Thus 
we  can  say  "  at  freedom,"  but  not 

"  At  honest  freedom. " — Cymb.  iii.  4.  71. 
"Sample  view."—  T.  N.  i.  I.  27. 
"  At  a  mournful  war." — Sonn.  46. 
"At heart' sez.se"— J.  C.  i.  2.  207. 
We  say  "at  loose,"  but  not 
"Time  .   .  .  often  at  his  very  loose  decides 
That  which  long  process  could  not  arbitrate," — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  752. 

where  "loose"  means  "loosing"  or  "parting." 

So  we  say  "  aside,"  but  not  t 

"To  hang  my  head  all  at  one  side."—Ot/ieIZc,  iv.  3.  22. 
We  say   "at  the  word,"  but,  with  the  indefinite  article,   "in  a 
word,"  not 

"No,  at  award,  madam." — Coriol,  i.  3.  122. 
It  is,   perhaps,   on  account  of  this  frequent  use  of  at  in  terse 
adverbial  phrases  that  it  prefers  monosyllables  to  dissyllables.     Thus 
we  have  "at  night"  and  "  at  noon,"  and  sometimes  "at  eve"  and 
"at  morn,"  but  rarely  "at  evening"    or    "at   morning,"   except 
where  "at  morning"  is  conjoined  with  "  at  night,"  as  in 
"At  morning  and  at  night" — M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  279. 
London  was  not  so  large  as  it  now  is  when  Shakespeare  wrote 
"  Inquire  at  London." — Rich.  II.  v.  3.  51. 

145.  By  (original  meaning  "near").     Hence  our  "to  come  by 
a  thing,"  i.e.  "to  come  near"  or  "attain." 

"  (How)  cam'st  thou  by  this  ill  tidings  T'—Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  80. 
"I'll  come  by  (i.e.  acquire)  Naples."—  Temp.  ii.  I.  292. 


PREPOSITIONS.  97 

By  is  used  in  a  manner  approaching  its  original  meaning  in 

"Fed  his  flocks 
By  (on)  the  fat  plains  of  fruitful  Thessaly." 

B.  and  F.  Fair  Sh.  L  I. 

"At  a  fair  vestal  throned  by  the  west." — M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  68. 
So  Wicklifle:  "By  (on)  everi  Saboth,"  Acts  xiii.  27.  Somewhat 
similar  is  our  present  colloquial  "by  this"  of  time;  an  expression 
which  is  found  in 

"  Of  the  poor  suppliant  who  by  this  I  know 
Is  here  attending." — A.  W.  v.  3.  134;  Lear,  iv.  6.  45. 

This  is  illustrated  by  the  play  on  "by  your  favour,"  where  favour 
means  also  "complexion,"  "face,"  in 

"    Duke.  Thine  eye 

Hath  stay'd  upon  some  favour  that  it  loves, 
Hath  it  not,  boy? 

Viola.  A  little,  by  yovr  favour. "—  T.  N.  ii.  4.  26. 

Compare  also  the  puns  in  T.  N.  Hi.  I.  2-10. 
Hence  "about,"  "concerning." 

"  How  say  you  by  the  French  lord?"— M.  of  V.  i.  2.  60. 
"Tell  me,  sirrah,  but  tell  me  true,  I  charge  you, 
By  him  and  by  this  woman  here  what  know  you  ?" 

A.  W.  v.  3.  237. 
"  I  would  not  have  him  know  so  much  by  me." 

L.  L.  L.  iv.  3.  150. 

"  I  know  nothing  by  myself,"  I  Cor.  iv.  4  (no  harm  about  myself). 
"  Many  may  be  meant  by  (to  refer  to)  the  fool  multitude." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  25. 
Compare  B.  J.  Poetast.  v.  I  : 

"      Lupus.  Is  not  that  eagle  meant  by  Caesar,  ha  ?  .... 
Cffsar.    Who  was  it,  Lupus,  that  inform'd  you  first 
This  should  be  meant  by  us  ?" 

Hence  from  near  came  the  meaning  like,  according  to. 

"  It  lies  you  on  to  speak 

Not  by  your  own  instruction,  nor  by  the  matter 
Which  your  own  heart  prompts  you." — Coriol.  iii.  2.  52. 

"And  him  by  oath  they  duly  honoured." — J?.  of  L.  410. 
i.e.  "  according  to  their  oath." 

"  Not  friended  by  his  wish,  to  your  high  person 
His  will  is  most  malignant." — Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  40. 

i.e.  "  in  accordance  with  his  wish,"  "to  his  heart's  content." 
H 


98  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  If  my  brother  wrought  by  my  pity  it  should  not  be  so." 

M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  224. 
"  I  will  believe  you  by  the  syllable 
Of  what  you  shall  deliver/'— P.  of  T.  v.  i.  170. 

So,  where  we  say  "to  the  sound  of:" 

"Sound  all  the  lofty  instruments  of  war, 
And  by  that  music  let  us  all  embrace." 

By  seems  to  mean  "near,"  hence  "with,"  in 
"  (My  daughter)  hath  his  solicitings, 
As  they  fell  out  by  time,  by  means  and  place, 
All  given  to  mine  ear." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  127. 

Perhaps  we  may  thus  explain  : 

"  I'll  trust  by  leisure  him  that  mocks  me  once." — T.  A.\.  I.  301. 
i.t.  "  in  accordance  with,  to  suit,  my  leisure." 
The  use  of  by  in 

"The  people  .  .  .  by  numbers  swarm  to  us," 

3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  2.  2. 
is  the  same  as  in 

"By  ones,  by  twos,  by  threes." — Coriol.  ii.  3.  47. 
By,  in  the  sense  of  "near,"  like  our  "about"  (Acts  xiii.  21, 
Wick,  "fy  fourti  yeeris,"  the  rest  "about"),  Greek  Kard,  was  used 
from  the  first  in  rough  distributive  measurements  in  E.  E. :  "  He 
smote  to  the  ground  by  three,  by  four,"  "by  nine  and  ten,"  "by 
one  and  one."  So 

"  I  play  the  torturer  by  small  and  small 
To  lengthen  out  the  worst  that  must  be  said." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  189. 

i.e.  "in  lengthening  out  £/ little  and  little."  Hence,  perhaps,  from 
"  by  one  by  one  "  sprang  our  shorter  form,  "  one  by  one,"  "  little  by 
little  ;"  though  it  is  possible  that  "  one  by  one  "  means  "  one  next  to 
or  after  one. " 

By  is  used  as  a  noun  in  the  expression   "on  the  by"  (as  one 
passes  by).— B.  J.   746. 

We   still  use  by  as  an  adverb  after  "close,"  "hard,"  &c.,  but 
we  should  scarcely  say, 

"I  stole  into  a  neighbour  thicket  by."—L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  94. 

146.  By  ("near,"  "following  close  after,"  hence   "as  a  con- 
sequence of  "). 


PREPOSITIONS.  99 

"The  bishop  of  York, 
Fell  Warwick's  brother,  and,  by  that,  our  foe." 

3  Hen.  VI .  iv.  4.  12. 
"  Lest,  by  a  multitude 
The  new-heal'd  wound  of  malice  should  break  out." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  124. 
"  So  the  remembrance  of  my  former  love 

Is  by  a  newer  object  quite  forgotten." — R.  andj.  ii.  4  194. 
"  Fear'd  by  their  breed  and  famous  by  their  birth." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  52. 

Hence  sometimes  it  seems  to  be  (but  is  not)  used  instrumentally 
with  adjectives  which  appear  to  be  (but  are  not)  used  as  passive  verbs. 
By  does  not  mean  "  by  means  of,"  but  "  as  a  consequence  of,"  in 
"An  eagle  sharp  by  fast." — V.  and  A.  55. 
"Oh  how  much  more  does  beauty  beauteotts  seem 

By  that  sweet  ornament  which  truth  doth  give." — Sonn. 
"  Laer.  Where  is  my  father  ? 
A'ing.  Dead ! 

Queen.  But  not  by  him." 

Hamlet,  iv.  5.  128. 

147.  For  (original  meaning  "before,"  "in  front  of ").     A  man 
who  stands  hrYront  of  another  in  battle  may  either  stand  as  his  friend 
for  him  or  as  his  foe  against  him.     Hence  two  meanings  si  for, 
the  former  the  more  common.*. 

148.  (I.)  For,  meaning  "in  front  of,"  is  connected  with  "instead 
of,"  "in  the  place  of,"  "  as  being." 

"  Or  for  the  lawrell  he  may  gain  a  scorne." 

B.  J.  on  Shakespeare 
i.e.  "instead  of  the  laurel." 

"  See  what  now  thou  art, 
For  happy  wife,  a  most  distressed  widow, 
For  joyful  mother,  one  that  wails  the  name, 
For  queen,  a  very  caitiff  crown'd  with  care." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  98. 

"Thyself  a  queen,yi?r  me  that  was  a  queen." — Ib.  i.  3.  202. 
Between  this  and  the  following  meanings  we  may  place 
"  Learn  now,  for  all. " — Cynib.  ii.  3.  111. 
"  This  is/or  a.\L"—tfam/et,  i.  3.  131. 
i.e.  "  once  instead  of,  or  in  the  place  of,  all." 

*  Comp.  UI»TI,  which  in  composition  denotes  agai*stt  and  at  other  times  instead 
of,  for. 

H  2 


,00  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  I  abjure 

The  taints  and  blames  I  laid  upon  myself 
for  (as  being)  strangers  to  my  nature." — Macbeth,  iv.  3.  125. 
"Conscience  ...  is  turned  out   of  all  towns  and  cities  for  a 
dangerous  thing." — Rich.  HI.  \.  4.  146. 

"  How  often  have  I  sat  crown'd  with  fresh  flowers 
For  summer's  queen  !"— B.  and  F.  Fair  Sh.  i.  I. 

Hence  for  is  nearly  redundant  in 

"  Let  the  forfeit 
Be  nominated  for  an  equal  pound."— M.  of  V.  i.  3.  150. 

There  is  a  play  on  the  word  in 

"  On  went  he/or  a  search,  and  away  went  I  for  (packed  up  in  a 
basket  and  treated  like)  old  clothes."—^/.  W.  of  W.  iii.  5.  100. 
"  Three  dukes  of  Somerset  three-fold  renown'd 
For  hardy  and  undoubted  champions." — 3  Hen.  VI.  v.  7.  6. 

(Where  probably  hardy  means  Fr.  hardi,  "bold;"  and  "un- 
doubted" means  "not  frightened,"  "doubt"  like  "fear"  being 
used  for  "frighten.") 

Perhaps  for  comes  under  this  head  in 

"  What  is  he  for  a  fool  that  betroths  himself  to  unquietness. " 

M.  Ado,  I  3.  49. 

i.e.  "  What  is  he,  as  being  a  fool."     It  is  more  intelligible  when  the 
order  is  changed:  "For  a  fool,  wh,at  is  he,"  i.e.  "considered  as  a 
fool — it  being  granted  that  he  is 'a  fool — what  kind  of  fool  is  he?" 
So       "  What  is  he  for  a  vicar?"— B.  J.  Sit.  Worn.  iii.  i.  med. 
So  in  German  "was  fur  ein?" 

149.  For  is  hence  loosely  used  in  the  sense  "  as  regards." 

"  It  was  young  counselor  the  persons  and  violent  counsel  for 
the  matter."— B.  E.  75. 

Very  commonly  ihisfor  stands  first,  before  an  emphatic  subject  or 
object,  which  is  intended  to  stand  in  a  prominent  and  emphatic 
position  : 

"  For  your  desire  to  know  what  is  between  us, 

O'er-master  it  as  you  may." — Hamlet,  i.  5.  39  ;  2.  112. 
"  Now,  for  the  taking  of  Sicily,  the  Athenians  did  marvellously 
covet  it."— N.  P.  171. 

"  For  your  intent, 
It  is  most  retrograde  to  our  desires. " 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  112  ;  Rich.  II.  v.  3.  137. 


PREPOSITIONS.  101 

"  For  a  certain  term,"  "for  seven  days,  a  day"  (or  even  "for  the 
day  "  where  one  day  is  meant),  is  still  customary,  but  not 

"  Doom'd  for  a  certain  term  to  walk  the  night, 
And  for  the  day  confined  to  fast  in  fires." — Hamlet,  i.  4.  11. 

150.  For,  from  meaning  "in  front  of,"  came  naturally  to  mean 
"in  behalf  of,"  "for  the  sake  of,"  "because  of." 

"Yet  I  must  not  (kill  Banquo  openly), 
For  certain  friends  that  are  both  his  and  mine. " 

Macbeth,  iii.  i.  120. 
i.e.  " because  of  certain  friends. " 

This  use  was  much  more  common  than  with  us.  When  we  refer 
to  the  past  we  generally  use  "because  of,"  reserving  for  for  the 
future.  Compare,  on  the  other  hand  : 

"  O  be  not  proud,  nor  brag  not  of  thy  might, 
For  mastering  her  that  foil'd  the  God  of  fight." 

V.  and  A.  114. 
"  He  gave  it  out  that  he  must  depart  for  certain  news. " 

N.  P.  179. 
"  No  way  to  that,y£>r  weakness,  which  she  enter'd." 

i  Hen.  VL  iii.  2.  25. 

i.e.  "  no  way  can  be  compared  for  weakness  with  that,"  &c. 

"  Of  divers  humours  one  must  be  chiefly  predominant,  but  it  is 
not  with  so  full  an  advantage  but,  for  the  volubilitie  and  supplenes 
of  the  mind,  the  weaker  may  by  occasion  reobtaine  the  place  again. " 
—MONTAIGNE,  116. 

For  is  similarly  used  with  an  ellipse  of  "  I  lay  a  wager  "  in 

"  Now,y0r  my  life,  she's  wandering  to  the  Tower." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  i.  3. 

151.  For,   in  the  sense  of   "because   of,"  is  found  not   only 
governing  a  noun,  but  also  governing  a  clause  : 

"  You  may  not  so  extenuate  his  offence 

For  I  have  had  such  faults."— M.for  M.  ii.  i.  28. 
i.e.  "  because  I  have  had  such  faults." 

"('Tis  ungrateful)  to  be  thus  opposite  with  heaven, 
For  (because)  it  requires  the  royal  debt  it  lent  you." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  95. 

So  Othello,  i.  3.  269 ;    Cymb.  iv.  2.  129.     And  parenthetically  very 
frequently  : 


102  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  The  canker- blossoms  have  as  deep  a  dye 
As  the  perfumed  tincture  of  the  roses, 
But/<?r  their  virtue  only  is  their  shew, 
They  live  unwoo'd,  and  unrespected  fade." — Sonn.  54. 

"Oh,  it  is  as  lawful, 
For  we  would  give  much,  to  use  violent  thefts. " 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  I.  21. 

i.e.  to  rob,  "  because  we  wish  to  be  generous." 
With  the  future,  for  meant  "in  order  that." 

"  And,  for  the  time  shall  not  seem  tedious, 
I'll  tell  thee  what  befel  me."— 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  11 

The  desire  of  clearness  and  emphasis  led  to  the  addition  of  because. 
"  Butyfrr  because  it  liketh  well  our  eyes." — N.  P.  Pref. 
"  And  for  because  the  world  is  populous." — Rich.  II.  v.  5.  3. 
Comp.  "  but  only,"  "  more  better, "  &c. 

For,  when  thus  followed  by  a  verb,  like  offer,  before,  &c.  ("after 
he  came,"  "before  he  went"),  is  called  a  conjunction.     It  is  often, 
like    other    prepositions    (287)   thus    used,  followed    by    "that." 
Coriol.  iii.  3.  93,  &c.     The  two  uses  occur  together  in  the  following 
passage,  which  well  illustrates  the  transition  of  for  : 
"  I  hate  him/or  he  is  a  Christian, 
But  more/or  that ...  he  lends,"  &C.—M.  of  V.  i.  3.  43. 

152.  For  to,  which  is  now  never  joined  with  the  infinitive  except 
by  a  vulgarism,  was  very  common  in  E.  E.  and  A.-S.,  and  is  not 
uncommon  in  the  Elizabethan  writers.  It  probably  owes  its  origin 
to  the  fact  that  the  prepositional  meaning  of  "to"  was  gradually 
weakened  as  it  came  to  be  considered  nothing  but  the  sign  of  the 
infinitive.  Hence  for  was  added  to  give  the  notion  of  motion  or 
purpose.  Similarly  in  Danish  and  Swedish  (Matzner,  ii.  p.  54)  "  for 
at "  is  used.  Both  in  E.  E.  and  in  Elizabethan  writers  the  for  is 
sometimes  added  to  the  latter  of  two  infinitives  as  being,  by  a  longer 
interval,  disconnected  from  the  finite  verb,  and  therefore  requiring 
an  additional  connecting  particle  : 

"  First,  honour'd  Virgin,  to  behold  thy  face 

Where  all  good  dwells  that  is  ;  nextyfrr  to  try,"  &c. 

B.  and  F.  Fair  Sh.  v.  I. 
For  the  same  reason : 

"Let  your  highness 

Lay  a  more  noble  thought  upon  mine  honour 
Than/?;-  to  think  that  I  would  sink  it  here."— A.  W.  v.  3.  181. 


PREPOSITIONS.  103 

From  the  earliest  period  "for  to,"  like  "to,"  is  found  used 
without  any  notion  of  purpose,  simply  as  the  sign  of  the  infinitive. 
So  in  Shakespeare  : 

"  Forbid  the  sea/^r  to  obey  the  moon."—  W.  T.  i.  2.  427. 

153.  For,    variable.      The   following  passage   illustrates   the 
variableness  si  for  : 

"  Princes  have  but  their  titles  for  (to  represent)  their  glories, 
An  outward  honour  for  (as  the  reward  of)  an  inward  toil, 
And  for  (for  the  sake  of  gaining)  unfelt  (unsubstantial)  imagi- 
nation 
They  often  feel  a  world  of  restless  cares."— Rich. III.  i.  4.  78-80 

154.  (H.)  For  (in  opposition  to) :  hence  "to  prevent." 

"  And  over  that  an  habergeon  for  percing  of  his  herte." 

CHAUCER,  Sire  Thopas,  13790. 
" Love.  Is  there  an  officer  there? 

Off.  Yes,  two  or  three  for  failing."— B.  J.  Alch.  \.  3. 
"  The  which  he  will  not  every  hour  survey 

For  blunting  the  fine  point  of  seldom  pleasure." — Sonn.  52. 
"  We'll  have  a  bib  for  spoiling  of  thy  doublet." 

B.  and  F.  (Nares). 

So  it  is  said  of  Procrustes,  that  if  his  victim  was  too  long  for  the 
bed,  "he  cut  off  his  legs  for  catching  cold." — Eupkues  (Malone). 

It  can  be  proved  that  Sir  T.  North  regarded  for  as  meaning  "  in 
spite  of,"  since  he  translates  "  Mais,  nonobstant  toutes  ces  raisons," 
by  "But,  for  all  these  reasons,"  (N.  P.  172);  where  the  context 
also  shows  beyond  dispute  that  for  has  this  meaning.  On  the  other 
hand,  in 

"  All  out  of  work  and  cold  for  action," — Hen.  V.  i.  2. 
for  seems  to  mean  "for  want  of,"  unless  "out  of  work  and  cold" 
can  be  treated  as  equivalent  to  "  eager,"  which  would  naturally  be 
followed  by  for. 

For  is  found  in  E.  E.  in  this  sense,  but  perhaps  always  with  the 
emphatic  "all." 

For  in  this  sense  is  sometimes  used  as  a  conjunction : 

"/brail  he  be  a  Roman."—  Cymb.  v.  4.  109. 
i.e.  "  Despite  that  he  be  a  Roman." 

For  may  either  mean  "  against  "  or  (149)  "  for  what  concerns  "  in 
"  I  warrant  him  for  drowning." —  Temp.  i.  I.  47. 


104  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  still  retain  the  use  of  for  in  the  sense  of  in  spite  of,  as  in 
"for  all  your  plots  I  will  succeed."  Such  phrases,  however,  fre- 
quently contain  a  negative,  in  which  case  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain 
whether  for  means  because  of  or  in  spite  of. 

"  My  father  is  not  deader  all  your  saying." 

Macbeth,  iv.  2.  36. 

"  (The  stars)  will  not  take  their  flight 
For  all  the  rooming  light." — MILTON,  Hymn  on  the  Nativity. 

It  is  a  question  how  to  punctuate 

"To  fall  off 

From  their  Creator  and  transgress  his  will 
For  one  restraint  lords  of  the  world  besides." 

MILTON,  P.  L.  i.  32. 

If  a  comma  be  placed  after  "will,"  and  not  after  "restraint,"  then 
"  besides  "  should  be  treated  as  though  it  were  "except"  or  "but:" 
"  Lords  of  the  world  \>u\.for  one  restraint." 

155.  For  is  sometimes  ready  for,  fit  for.     (See  405.) 

"  He  isyfcr  no  gallants'  company  without  them." 

B.  J.  E.  in  &>c.  i.  I. 

.  "Your  store  is  not/or  idle  markets."—  T.  N.  iii.  3.  46. 

Compare  our  "  I  &n\for  (going  to)  Paris." 

Some  ellipsis,  as  "  I  pray,"  must  be  understood  in 

"(I  pray)  God/or  his  mercy."— Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  98  ;  v.  2.  75. 

156.  Forth  is  used  as  a  preposition  (from) : 

"  Steal  forth  thy  father's  house."— M.  N.  D.  i.  I.  164. 
"  Loosed  them  forth  their  brazen  caves." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  89,  and  I  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  54. 
Sometimes  with  "of"  or  "from  :" 

"  That  wash'd  his  father's  fortunes  forth  of  France." 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  2.  157. 

So  Rich.  II.  ill  2.  204-5;  Temp.  v.  i.  160.  The  "of"  in  itself 
implies  motion  from.  (See  165.) 

"From /*•//&  the  streets  of  Pomfret. "— K.  J.  iv.  2.  148. 
So  Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  106. 

Forth,  being  thus  joined  with  prepositions  less  emphatic  than 
itself,  gradually  assumed  a  prepositional  meaning,  displacing  the 
prepositions.  Forth  is  not  found  as  a  preposition  in  E.  E.  See 

also  Prepositions  omitted. 


PREPOSITIONS.  105 

157.  From   is   sometimes  joined  with   out,   to  signify  outward 
motion,  where  we  use  out  of. 

"  In  purchasing  the  semblance  of  my  soul 

From  out  the  state  of  hellish  cruelty.  n—M.  of  V.  iii.  4.  20. 
"From  out  the  fiery  portal  of  the  East."— Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  64. 

158.  From   is  frequently  used  in   the  sense  of  "apart  from," 
"  away  from,"  without  a  verb  of  motion. 

"Front  thence  (i.e.  away  from  home)  the  sauce  to  meat  is 

ceremony." — Macbeth,  iii.  4.  36. 

"  I  am  best  pleased  to  be  from  such  a  deed." — K.  J.  iv.  I.  86. 
"Which  is  from  (out  of)  my  remembrance." — Temp.\.  I.  65. 
"They  run  themselves  from  breath." — B.  J.  Cy.'s  Rev.  i.  I. 
"Clean from  the  purpose."— J.  C.  i.  3.  35. 
"  This  discourse  is  from  the  subject." — B.  and  F.  Eld.  B.v.  i. 
"This  is  from  my  commission." — T.  N.  i.  5.  208. 
"  Anything  so  overdone  is  from  the  purpose  of  playing." 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  22. 

"This  is  from  the  present."— A.  and  C.  ii.  6.  30. 
Hence  "  differently  from :  " 

"  Words  him  a  great  deal  from  the  matter." — Cymb.  L  4.  16. 
i.e.  "describes  him  in  a  manner  departingynwz  the  truth." 

"  This  label  on  my  bosom  whose  containing 
Is  so  from  sense  in  hardness." — Cymb.  v.  5.  431. 

"  Write  from  it,  if  you  can.  in  hand  and  phrase." 

T.  N.  v.  i.  340. 

' '  For  he  is  superstitious  grown  of  late 
Quite  from  the  main  opinion  he  held  once."— J.  C.  ii.  I.  196. 

"  So  from  himself  impiety  hath  wrought." — R.  of  L. 

"To  be  so  odd  and  from  all  fashions."—^/.  Ado,  iii.  i.  72. 

"  Particular  addition  from  the  bill 
That  writes  them  all  alike." — Macbeth,  iii.  i.  100. 

This  explains  the  play  on  the  word  in 

"  Queen.  That  thou  dost  love  thy  daughteryhw/  thy  soul." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  258. 
"  I  wish  you  all  the  joy  that  you  can  wish, 
For  I  am  sure  you  can  wish  none  from  me." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  192. 

i.e.  "none  differently  from  me,"  "none  which  I  do  not  wish  you." 
This  is  probably  the  correct  interpretation  of  the  last  passage.  So 
Othello,  i.  i.  132. 


io6  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  If  aught  possess  thee/raw  me." — C.  of  E.  ii.  2.  180. 
Also  "apart  from  :" 

"  Nay,  that's  my  own  from  any  nymph  in  the  court." 

B.  J.  Cy.'s  Rev.  ii.  I. 
"From  thee  to  die  were  torture  more  than  death." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  401. 

159.  In,  like  the  kindred  preposition  on  (Chaucer  uses  "in  a  hill" 
for  "on  a  hill"),  was  used  with  verbs  of  motion  as  well  as  rest. 
We  still  say  "  he  fell  in  love,"  "his  conduct  came  in  question." 

"  He  fell  in  a  kind  of  familiar  friendship  with  Socrates." 

N.  P.  192. 
"  Duncane  fell  in  fained  communion  with  Sueno." 

HOLINSHED. 

"/«  so  profound  abysm  I  throw  all  care." — Sonn.  1 12. 
"  Cast  yourself  in  wonder." — J.  C.  i.  3.  60. 
"Sounds  of  music  creep  in  our  ears." — M.  of  V.  v.  I.  56. 
' '  They  who  brought  me  in  my  master's  hate. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  2.  56. 
"  But  first  I'll  turn  yon  fellow  in  his  grave." 

Ib.  i.  2.  262 ;  3.  88. 

"  And  throw  them  in  the  entrails  of  a  wolf." — Ib.  iv.  3.  23. 
"  If  ever  ye  came  in  hell." — UDALL. 

In  (for  "  into")  with  "  enter,"  Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  160  ;  Rich.  III.  v. 
3-  227. 

Into  is  conversely  sometimes  found  with  verbs  of  rest  implying 
motion.      "  Is  all  my  armour  laid  into  my  tent?"—  Rich.  III.  v.  5. 51. 
"Confin'd  into  this  rock." — Tempest,  i.  2.  361. 
"  To  appear  into  the  world." — MONTAIGNE,  224. 
And  earlier  "  Hid  into  three  measures  of  meal."— WICKLIFFE, 
Luke  \\\\.  21. 

160,  In  for  on  : 

"  What  in  your  own  part  (side)  can  you  say  to  this  ?" 

Othello,  i.  3.  74. 

So  in  the  phrase  "in  the  neck,"  where  we  should  say  "on  the 
neck  "  or  "on  the  heels." 

"  Soon  after  that  depriv'd  him  of  his  life 
And,  in  the  neck  of  that,  task'd  the  whole  state." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  92. 


PREPOSITIONS.  107 

The  same  phrase  occurs  Sonn.  131 ;  MONTAIGNE,  17;  N.  P.  172. 
"///  pain  of  your  dislike."— 2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  257. 

161.  In  for  "during"  or  "at."     In  has  now  almost   lost  its 
metaphorical  use  applied  to  time.     As  early  as  the  sixteenth  century 
"  In  the  day  of  Sabbath  "  (  WICKLIFFE,  Acts  xiii.  14)  was  replaced 
by  "on."     It  is  still  retained  where  the  proper  meaning  of  "in," 
"in  the  limits  of,"  is  implied,  as  with  plurals,  "  Once  in  ten  days" 
or  "for  once  in  my  life,"  or  "he  does  more  in  one  day  than  others 
in  two."     Thus  A.  V.  Gen.  viii.  4,  "  In  the  seventh  month,  on  the 
eighteenth  day."     We  also  find  frequently  in  the  A.  V.    "  In  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  in  the  day  when,"  &c.  "  in  the  day  of  judgment." 
This  may  in  part  be  due  to  a  desire  to  retain  the  more  archaic 
idiom,  as  being  more  solemn  and   appropriate  ;   but  perhaps  the 
local  meaning  of  in  may  be  here  recognized.     We  still  say  "  in 
this   calamity,    crisis,"  &c.    where   we  mean   "entangled  in,   sur- 
rounded by  the  perils  of  this  calamity  ;"  and  some  such  meaning 
may  attach  to   "in"  when  we  say   "/«    the  day  of  tribulation, 
vengeance,"  &c.     Occasionally,  however,  we  find  "at  the  day  of 
judgment "  (Matt.  xi.  22),  as  also  in  Shakespeare  in  the  only  passage 
where  this  phrase  occurs.     Shakespeare  frequently  uses  in  for  "  at " 
or  "during." 

"  How  !  the  duke  in  council 
In  this  time  of  the  night." — Othello,  i.  2.  93. 
"  In  night." — V.  and  A.  720. 
"  In  all  which  time."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  127. 
"  In  such  a  night  as  this."— M.  ofV.\.  i.  1,  6,  9. 

"This  is,  sir,  a  doubt 
In  such  a  time  as  this,  nothing  becoming  you." 

Cyntb.  iv.  4.  15. 
"  Nay,  we  will  slink  away  in  supper-time." — M.  ofV.  ii.  4.  1. 

162.  In  metaphorically  used  for  "in  the  case  of,"  "about,"  &c. 
"  Triumph  in  so  false  a  foe." — R.  of  L. 

" In  second  voice  we'll  not  be  satisfied." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  149. 
"  Almost  all 

Repent  in  their  election." — CorioL  ii.  3.  263. 
"Our  fears  in  Banquo  stick  deep." — Macb.  iii.  I.  49. 
"  (We)  wear  our  health  but  sickly  in  his  life 
Which  in  his  death  were  perfect." — Ib.  iii.  I.  107. 


io8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  say  " in  my  own  person"  or  "by  myself,"  not 

"  Which  in  myself  I  boldly  will  defend."— Rich.  II.  i.  1. 145. 
So    "  But  I  bethink  me  what  a  weary  way 

In  Ross  and  Willoughby  .  .  .  will  be  found."— Ib.  ii.  2.  10. 

i.e.  "in  the  case  of  Ross,"  equivalent  to  "by  Ross." 

In  is  used  metaphorically  where  we  should  say  "in  the  thought 
of"  in 

"  Strengthen  your  patience  in  our  last  night's  speech." 

Hamlet,  v.  I.  317. 

163.  In.  We  still  say  "  it  lies  in  your  power."  But  we  find  also— 
"  And  the  offender's  life  lies  in  the  mercy 

Of  the  duke  only,"— M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  355. 

where  we  now  should  use  at.     This  example  illustrates  the  appa- 
rently capricious  change  in  the  use  of  prepositions. 
We  should  now  use  at  instead  of  in  and  of,  in 

"In  night  and  on  the  court  and  guard  of  safety." 

Othello,  ii.  3.  216. 
and      "  What !  in  a  town  ^war."*— Ib.  213. 

"/in-round"  (O.  Fr.  "en  rond")  is  used  for  the  more  modern 
"  a-round"  in 

"  They  compassed  him  in  round  among  themselves." — N.  P.  192. 
But  probably  "round"  is  for  "around."  Compare  "compassed 
him  »»."_A.  V.  2  Chron.  xxi.  9. 

164.  In  is  used  with  a  verbal  to  signify   "in  the  act  of"  or 
"  while." 

"  He  raves  in  saying  nothing."— TV.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  247. 

"  When  you  cast 

Your  stinking  greasy  caps  in  hooting  at 
Coriolanus'  exile."— Coriol.  iv.  6.  131. 
"  Mine  eyes,  the  outward  watch 
Whereto  my  finger  like  a  dial's  point 

Is  pointing  still,  in  cleansing  them  from  tears."— Rich.  II.  v.  5.  54. 
"  The  fire  that  mounts  the  liquor  till't  run  o'er, 

In  seeming  to  augment  it,  wastes  \t."—Hen.  VIII.  i.  I.  145. 
"  And  may  ye  both  be  suddenly  surprised 
By  bloody  hands  in  sleeping  on  your  beds."— I  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  41. 

nro^hl'  'htOWniVf  ™rti'fff*-r-  »•  4-  7,  means  "garrisoned  towns,"  and  so 
probably  here,  like  our  "  man  ofwzr." 


PREPOSITIONS.  109 

"  As  patches  set  upon  a  little  breach 

Discredit  more  in  hiding  of  the  fault." — K.  J.  iv.  2.  30. 

It  is  probable,  as  the  last  example  suggests,  that  these  verbals  are 
nouns  after  which  "of"  is  sometimes  expressed.  Hence  " in  sleep- 
ing" may  simply  be  another  form  of  "  a-sleeping."  But  the  in 
brings  out,  more  strongly  than  the  a-,  the  time  in  which,  or  while, 
the  action  is  being  performed.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  influence 
of  the  French  idiom,  "en  disant  ces  mots,"  tended  to  mislead 
English  authors  into  the  belief  that  in  was  superfluous,  and  that  the 
verbals  thus  used  were  present  participles.  (See  also  93.)  In  is  used 
thus  with  a  noun  : 

"  Wept  like  two  children  in  (during)  their  deaths'  sad  stories." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  3.  8. 

"  (These  blazes)  giving  more  light  than  heat,  extinct  in  both, 
Even  in  their  promise,  while  it  is  a-making." 

Hamlet,  13.  119. 

165.  Of  (original ^ meaning  "off"  or  "from").  Comp.  diro  ; 
"  ab,"  Mceso-Gothic '"  af." 

In  Early  English  of  is  used  for  "From,"  "out  of,"  "off,"  as  in 
"  He  lighted  of  his  steed,  arose  of  the  dead,"  ' '  The  leaves  fall  of 
the  tree. "  This  strong  meaning  of  motion  was  afterwards  assigned 
to  "off""  (which  is  merely  an  emphatic  form  of  o/),  and  hence  oj 
retained  only  a  slight  meaning  of  motion,  which  frequently  merged 
into  causality,  neighbourhood,  possession,  &c. 

Off  is,  perhaps,  simply  of  in 

"  Over-done  or  come  tardy  off."* — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  28. 
i.e.  "fallen  short  of."    Compare  ixrrfpf^.     Otherwise  "come  off"  is 
a  passive  participle,  295. 

Of  retains  its  original  meaning  in 

"  Overhear  this  speech 
Of  vantage."— Hamlet,  iii.  3.  33. 

i.e.  "from  the  vantage-ground  of  concealment." 

"  Therefore  of  all  hands  must  we  be  forsworn." 

L.  L.  L.  iv.  3.  219. 

i.e.    "from  all  sides,"  "to  which  ever  side  one  looks;"  hence  "in 
any  case." 

"  Being  regarded  o/a\l  hands  by  the  Grecians."— N.  P.  176. 
*  Compare  "Too  late  O/QUT  intents."— Rich.  III.  iii.  5.  09. 


no  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So  our  modem  "off  hand,"  applied  to  a  deed  coming  from  the 
hand,  and  not  from  the  head.  Hence  "of  hand"  is  used  where  we 
use  "on"  (175)  in 

"  Turn  of  no  hand."— M.  of  V.  ii.  2.  45. 

Of  also  retains  this  meaning  with  some  local  adjectives  and  ad- 
verbs, such  as  "  north  of"  "  south  of"  "  within  fifteen  hundred  paces 
of"  (Hen.  V.  iii.  7.  136).  We  could  say  "the  advantage  of"  but 
not  "  You  should  not  have  the  eminence  of  him." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  266. 
'  There  is  a  testril  of  (from)  me  too."—  T.  N.  ii.  3.  34. 

166.  Of  used  for  "out  of,"  "from,"  with  verbs  that  signify,  either 
literally  or  metaphorically,  depriving,  delivering,  &c. 

"  We'll  deliver  you  of  your  great  danger." — Coriol.  v.  6.  14. 
"  I  may  be  delivered  of  these  woes." — K.  J.  iii.  4.  56. 
This  use  of  of  is  still  retained  in  the  phrase  "to  be  delivered  of  a 
child." 

"  Heaven  make  thee  free  of  it." — Hamlet,  v.  2.  342. 

"  To  help  him  of  his  blindness." — T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  2.  45. 

"Unfurnish  me  ^/"reason." — W.  T.\.  I.  123. 

"  Take  of  me  my  daughter."— M.  Ado,  ii.  i.  311. 

"  Rid  the  house  of  her."—  T.  Sh.  i.  I.  150. 

"  Scour  me  this  famous  realm  tf/"  enemies." — B.  and  F. 

"That  Lepidus  of  the  triumvirate 

Should  be  deposed." — A.  and  C.  iii.  6.  28. 
' '  His  cocks  do  win  the  battle  still  <7/"mine. " — A.  andC.  ii.  3. 36. 
"  Get  goal  for  goal  of  youth." — A.  and  C.  iv.  8.  22. 
"I  discharge  thee  of  thy  prisoner." — M.  Ado,  v.  I.  327. 
In  virtue  of  this  meaning,  of  is  frequently  placed  after  forth  and 
out,  to  signify  motion. 

Hence,  metaphorically, 

"  He  could  not  justify  himself  of  the  unjust  accusations."— N.  P.  173. 
Of  is  also  used  with  verbs  and  adjectives  implying  motion  from, 
such  as  "fail,"  "want,"  &c.     Hence — 

"  But  since  you  come  too  late  </our  intents."—  Rich.  III.  iii.  $.  69. 

167.  Of  thus  applied  to  time  means  "from,"    So  still  "of  late." 
"  I  took  him  of  a  child  up."— B.  J.  E.  in  &v.  ii.  i. 

i.e.  "from  a  child,  when  a  mere  child."     So  in  E.  E.  "of  youth." 


PREPOSITIONS.  in 

"  Of  long  time  he  had  bewitched  them  with  sorceries." 

Acts  viiL  1 1 . 
"  Being  of  so  young  days  brought  up  with  him." 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  11. 

168.  Of,  meaning  "from,"  passes  naturally  into   the  meaning 
"  resulting  from,"  "  as  a  consequence  of." 

"  Of  force."— M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  421  ;  I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  120. 

"  Of  no  right."— I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  100. 

"  Bold  of  your  worthiness." — L.  L.  L.  ii.  I.  28. 

"  We  were  dead  of  sleep. "—  Temp.  \.  i.  221. 

"  And  of  that  natural  luck 
He  beats  thee  'gainst  the  odds."— A.  and  C.  ii.  3.  26. 

Hence  "What  shall  become  ef  this?"  M.  Ado,  iv.  I.  211 ;   T.  N 
ii.  I.  37,  means  "  what  will  be  the  consequence  of  this  ?" 
So  "by  means  of:" 

"And  thus  do  we  of  wisdom  and  of  reach 
By  indirection  find  direction  out." — Hamlet,  ii.  I.  64. 

While  by  is  used   of  external  agencies,   of  is  used  of  internal 
motives,  thus: 

"  Comest  thou  hither  by  chance,  or  of  devotion  ?" 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  88. 

"  The  king  of  his  own  royal  disposition." — Rich.  III.  i.  3.  63. 
"  Of  purpose  to  obscure  my  noble  birth." — I  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  22. 
"  Art  thou  a  messenger,  or  come  of  pleasure  ?" 

2  Hen.  VI.  v.  I.  16. 
Sometimes  "out  of"  is  thus  used: 

"  But  thou  hast  forced  me, 
Out  of  thy  honest  truth,  to  play  the  woman. " 

Hen.  VIIL  iii  2.  431. 

Of,  "as  a  result  of,"  is  used  as  a  result  for  "with  the  aid  of," 
"with, "or  "at." 

"  That .  .  .  she  be  sent  over  ^the  King  of  England's  cost." 

2  Hen.   VI.  i.  i.  61. 

11  Of  the  city's  cost,  the  conduit  shall  run  nothing  but  claret  wine." 

Id.  iv.  6.  3. 
Hence  the  modern  phrase  "To  die  of  hunger." 

169.  Of  hence   is  used   in   appeals   and   adjurations   to  signify 
"out  of." 

"  Of  charity,  what  kin  are  you  to  me?"—  T.  N.  v.  I.  237. 


1 1 2  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Hence,  the  sense  of  "out  of"  being  lost,  =  "for  the  sake 
of,'"' by." 

"  Speak  o/all  loves."— M.  N.  D.  ii.  2.  154. 
This  explains 

"  Let  it  not  enter  in  your  mind,  of  love." — M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  42. 
Similar  is  the  use  of  of  in  protestations : 

"  Leon.  We'll  have  dancing  afterwards. 

Ben.    First,  of  my  word."—  T.  N.  v.  4.  123. 
"  A  proper  man,  of  mine  honour." — 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  2.  103. 

170.  Of  meaning  "from"  is  placed  before  an  agent  (from  whom 
the  action  is  regarded  as  proceeding)  where  we  use  "by." 

"  Received  of  (welcomed  by)  the  most  pious  Edward." 

Macb.  iii.  6.  27. 
"Like  stars  ashamed  of  day." — V.  and  A. 

i.e.   "  shamed  by  day." 

Of  is  frequently  thus  used  with  "long,"  "'long, "or  "along." 
— LAYAMON.  "Along  of"  =  "from  alongside  of"  (ir*pd 
with  gen. ). 

"The  good  old  man  would  fain  that  all  were  well 

So  'twere  not  'long  of  him." — 3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  7.  32. 
"'Long  all  ^Somerset.  "—I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  3.  46,  33. 
"I  am  so  wrapt  and   throwly  lapt  of  jolly  good  ale  and 
old. " — STILL. 

171.  Of  is  hence  used  not  merely  of  the  agent  but  also  of  the 
instrument.     This  is  most  common  with  verbs  of  construction,  and 
of  filling  ;  because  in  construction  and  filling  the  result  is  not  merely 
effected  with  the  instrument,  but  proceeds  out  of  it.     We  still  retain 
tf  with  verbs  of  construction  and  adjectives  of  fulness  ;  but  the  Eliza- 
bethans retained  of  with  verbs  of  fulness  also. 

"  Supplied  of  kernes  and  gallow-glasses. " — Macb.  i.  2.  13. 
"  I  am  provided  of  a.  torch-bearer."— AT.  of  V.,\\.  2.  24. 
"  You  are  not  satisfied  of  these  events."— /£.  v.  I.  297. 
"  Mettle — where^/"  thy  proud  child  arrogant  man  is  puffed." 

T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  180. 

"Mixt  partly  of  Mischief  and  partly  ^/Remedy."— B.  E.  114. 
Hence  "  Flies 

Whose  woven  wings  the  summer  dyes 

Of  many  colours."— B.  and  F.  Fair  Sh.  v.  I. 


PREPOSITIONS.  113 

Of  with  verbs  of  construction  from  "  out  of"  sometimes  assumes 
the  meaning  of  "  instead  of." 

"  Made  peace  of  enmity,  fair  love  of  hate." — Rich.  III.  ii.  I.  50. 
And  with  "  become  :  " 
"(Henry)  is  of  a.  king  become  a  banish 'd  man." — 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3. 25. 

172.  Of  is  hence  used  metaphorically  with  verbs  of  construction, 
as  in  the  modern 

"They  make  an  ass  of  me." — T.  N.  v.  i.  19. 
But  of  is  also  thus  found  without  verbs  of  construction,  as  . 

'  Apcm.  Or  thou  shall  find— 
Timon.  A  fool  of  thee.     Depart." 

T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  232. 
"  E'en  such  a  husband 

Hast  thou  of  me  as  she  is  for  a  wife."— M.  of  V.  iii.  5.  89. 
"  We  should  have  found  a  bloody  day  of  this."—  I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  7.  34. 

"  We  shall  find  of  him 
A  shrewd  contriver. "— y.  C.  ii.  I.  157. 
"  We  lost  a  jewel  of  her."— A.  W.  v.  3.  L 
"  You  have  a  nurse  of  me."—/1,  of  T.  iv.  i.  25. 
"You  shall  find  of  the  king,  sir,  a  father."— .4.  W.  i.  i.  7. 
i.e.  "in  the  king." 

173.  Of  is  hence  applied  not  merely  to  the  agent  and  the  instru- 
ment,   but  to  any  influencing  circumstance,    in   the  sense  of  "as 
regards,"  "what  comes  from." 

"Fantasy, 

Which  is  as  thin  of  substance  as  the  air."— R.  andj.  L  4.  99. 
"  Roses  are  fast  flowers  of  their  smells."— B.  E.  1 88. 
"  A  valiant  man  of  his  hands." — N.  P.  614. 
"  But  of  his  cheere  did  seem  too  solemn-sad." — SPEN.  F.  Q.  i.  I. 

Under  this  head  perhaps  come  : 

"  Niggard  of  question  ;  but  of  our  demands 
Most  free  in  his  reply." — Hamlet,  iii.  I.  13. 

"  Of  his  own  body  he  was  ill,  and  gave 
The  clergy  ill  example.  "—Hen.  VIII.  iv.  2.  43. 

"That  did  but  show  thee,  of  a  fool,  inconstant 
And  damnable  ungrateful,  "—ff:  T.  iii.  2.  187. 

i.e.  "  as  regards  a  fool,"  "  in  the  matter  of  folly." 

This  may  almost  be  called  a  locative  case,  and  may  illustrate  the 

I 


IH  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Latin  idiom  "versus  animi."    It  is  common  in  E.  E.     We  still  say, 
in  accordance  with  this  idiom,  "swift  a/foot,"  "ready  of  wit,"  &c. 

174.  Of  passes  easily  from  meaning  "as  regards"  to  "concern- 
ing," "about." 

"  Mine  own  escape  unfoldeth  to  my  hope 

The  like  <?/him."—  T.  AT.  i.  2.  21. 
"  You  make  me  study  of  that."—  Temp.  ii.  i.  81. 
"  Tis  pity  of  him."— M.  for  M.  ii.  3.  42  ;  A.  and  C.  i.  4.  71. 
"'Twere  pity  of  my  life."— M.  N.  D.  iii.  I.  44. 
"  I  wonder  of  there  being  together."—/**,  iv.  i.  128. 
"  Wise  ^(informed  of)  the  payment  day."— B.  E. 

"  He  shall  never  more 
Be  fear'd  of  doing  harm." — Lear,  ii.  2.  113. 
"  The  same  will,  I  hope,  happen  to  me,  of  death." 

MONTAIGNE,  36. 
i.e.  "with  respect  to  death." 

"  I  humbly  do  desire  your  grace  ^ pardon." 

M.ofV.iv.  I.  402. 
"  I  shall  desire  you  of  more  acquaintance." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  i.  183  ;  A.  Y.  L.  v.  4.  56. 

For  this  use  of  "desire"  compare  A.  V.  St.  John  xii.  21,  "  they 
dtrired\\\n\  saying,"  where  Wickliffe  has  "preieden,"  "prayed." 

"I  humbly  do  beseech  you  of  your  pardon." — O.  iii.  3.  212. 
"The  dauphin  whom  of  succours  we  entreated." 

Hen.  V.  iii.  3.  45. 

"Yet  of  your  royal  presence  I'll  adventure 
To  borrow  of  a.  week."—  W.  T.  L  2.  38. 
"  We'll  mannerly  demand  thee  of  thy  story." — Cymb.  iii.  6.  92. 
"  Enquire  of  him." — Rich.  II.  3.  186. 
i.e.  "  about  him." 

"  Discern  of  the  coming  on  of  years." — B.  E.  105. 

"  Having  determined  of  the  Volsces  and,"&c. — Coriol.  ii.2.41. 

"  I'll  venture  so  much  of  my  hawk  or  hound." 

T.  ofSh.  v.  2.  72. 
"  Since  of  your  lives  you  set 
So  slight  a  valuation."— Cymb.  iv.  4.  48. 
In     "  No  more  can  you  distinguish  of  a  man 

Than  of  his  outward  show," — Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  9,  10. 
the  meaning  seems  to  be,  "you  can  make  no  distinctions  about  men 
more  than,"  i.e.  "  except,  about  their  appearances."     So 


PREPOSITIONS.  1 1 5 

"  Since  my  soul  could  of  men  distinguish." — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  CJ). 
In  the  following  passages  we  should  now  use  "  for  :  " — 
"France  where*?/" England  hath  been  an  overmatch." — B.  E.  113. 
"  I  have  no  mind  ^/"feasting."  —  M.  of  V.  ii.  5.  37. 
"  In  change  of  him." — Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  27. 
"  Of  this  my  privacy  I  have  strong  reasons." 

TV.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  190. 
"  In  haste  where^  most  heartily  I  pray 
Your  highness  to  assign  our  trial  day." — Rich.  II.  L  I.  150. 

As  we  say  "  what  will  become  of  (about)  me  !"  so 
"What  will  betide  of  me."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  6. 

We  say  "  power  over  us,"  not 

"  The  sovereign  power  you  have  of  us." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  27. 

"  I  have  an  eye  on  him,"  not 

"Nay,  then,  I  have  an  eye  of  you." — Ib.  301. 

175.  Of  signifying  proximity  of  any  kind  is  sometimes  used  locally 
in  the  sense  of  "  on."  The  connection  between  of  and  on  is  illustrated 
by  M.  of  V.  ii.  2,  where  old  Gobbo  says  :  ' '  Thou  hast  got  more 
haire  on  thy  chin  than  Dobbin  my  philhorse  has  on  his  taile  ;'  and 
young  Gobbo  retorts,  ' '  I  am  sure  he  had  more  haire  of  his  taile  than 
I  have  of  my  face. " 

"  Gra.   My  master  riding  behind  my  mistress — 

Cart.   Both  of  one  horse."—  T.  of  Sh.  iv.  i.  71. 
Of  is  sometimes  used  metaphorically  for  "  on." 
Compare  "  A  plague  of  all  cowards  !" — I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  127. 
with          "A  plague  upon  this  howling." — Temp.  i.  I.  39. 

"Who  but  to-day  hammer'd  ^  this  design." — W.  T.  ii.  2.  49. 
"  I  go  </ message."— 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  113. 
A  message  may  be  regarded  as  a  motive  from  which,  or  as  an 
object  tmuards  which,  an  action  proceeds,  and  hence  either  of  or 
"on"  may  be  used. 

Compare  "  He  came  of  an  errand."— jJ/.  W.  of  W.  i.  4.  80. 
with          "I  will  go  on  the  slightest  errand."—  M.  Ado,  ii.  I.  272. 
"Sweet  mistress,  what  your  name  is  else  I  know  not, 

Nor  by  what  wonder  you  do  hit  of  mine." — C.of E.  iii.  2.  30. 
Add  also —  "  And  now  again 

Of  him  that  did  not  ask,  but  mock,  bestow 
Your  sued-for  tongues."—  Coriol.  ii.  3.  214. 
I  2 


ii6  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  I  shall  bestow  some  precepts  of  this  virgin." 

A.  IV.  iiL  5.  103  ;  T.  N.  iii.  4.  2. 

"Trustyng  <?/"  (comp.  "depending  on  ")  the  continuance." 

ASCH.  Ded. 

176.  Of,  signifying  "coming  from,"  "belonging  to,"  when  used 
with  time,  signifies  "during." 

"These  fifteen  years  :  by  my  fay  a  goodly  nap ! 

But  did  I  never  speak  of  all  that  time?"—  T.  of  Sh.  Ind.  2.  84. 
"There  sleeps  Titania  sometime  ofthz  night. "— M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  253. 
i.e.  "  sometimes  during  the  night." 

"  My  custom  always  of  the  afternoon." — Hamlet,  L  5.  60. 
"  And  not  be  seen  to  wink  of  all  the  day."—  L.  L.  L.  i.  I.  43. 
"  Of  the  present."—  Tempest,  i.  i.  24. 
So  often  "  Of  a  sudden." 

177.  Of  is  sometimes  used  to  separate  an  object  from  the  direct 
action  of  a  verb  :  (a)  when  the  verb  is  used  partitively,  as  "  eat  of," 
"  taste  of,"  &c. ;  (6)  when  the  verb  is  of  French  origin,  used  with 
"de,"  as   "doubt,"    "despair,"    "accuse,"   "repent,"   "arrest," 
"appeal,"  "accept,"   "allow;"  (f)  when  the  verb  is  not  always 
or  often  used  as  a  transitive  verb,  as  "hope"  or  "like,"  especially 
in  the  case  of  verbs  once  used  impersonally. 

(a)  "  King.   How  fares  our  cousin  Hamlet  ? 

Hamlet.  Excellent,  i'  faith  :  of  the  chameleon's  dish. " 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  98. 
(d)   "To  appeal  each  other  of  high  treason." — Rich.  II.  i.  I.  27. 

"  Of  capital  treason  we  arrest  you  here." — Ib.  iv.  I.  151. 
(c)   "  So  then  you  hope  of  pardon  from  Lord  Angelo  ?" 

M.forM.  iii.  I.  1. 
"  I  will  hope  ^better  deeds  to-morrow." — A.  and  C.  i.  I.  62. 

The  of  after  "to  like"  is  perhaps  a  result  of  the  old  impersonal 
use  of  the  verb,  "me  liketh,"  "him  liketh,"  which  might  seem  to 
disqualify  the  verb  from  taking  a  direct  object.  Similarly  "it 
repents  me  of"  becomes  "I  repent  of;"  "  I  complain  myself  of" 
becomes  "  I  complain  of."  So  in  E.  E.  "it  marvels  me  of"  becomes 
"  I  marvel  of."  Hence — 

"  It  was  a  lordling's  daughter  that  liked  of  her  master." 

P.  P.  16. 
"Thou  dislikest  of  virtue  for  the  name."— A.  W.  ii.  3.  131. 


PREPOSITIONS.  1 1 7 

"  I  am  a  husband  if  you  like  of  me." — M.  Ado,  v.  4.  59. 
So  Z.  L.  L.  i.  i.  107  ;  iv.  3.  158  ;  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  354. 

"To  like  of  nought  that  would  be  understood." 

BEAUMONT  on  B.  J. 

178.  Of  naturally  followed  a  verbal  noun.  In  many  cases  we 
should  call  the  verbal  noun  a  participle,  and  the  of  has  become 
unintelligible  to  us.  Thus  we  cannot  now  easily  see  why  Shake- 
speare should  write — 

"  Dick  the  shepherd  blows  his  nail." — Z.  Z.  Z.  v.  2.  923. 
and  on  the  other  hand — 

"  The  shepherd  blowing  of  his  nails." — 3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  3. 

But  in  the  latter  sentence  blowing  was  regarded  as  a  noun,  the 
prepositional  "a,"  "in,"  or  "on"  being  omitted. 

"  The  shepherd  was  a-blowing  of  his  nails." 

In  the  following  instances  we  should  now  be  inclined  to  treat  the 
verbal  as  a  present  participle  because  there  is  no  preposition  before  it : 

"  Here  stood  he  (fl-)mumbling  <?/"  wicked  charms."— Lear,  ii.  I.  41. 
"  We  took  him  (a-)setting  a/boys'  copies." — 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  2.  96. 
"  And  then  I  swore  thee,  (a-)saving  ofihy  life."— J.  C.  v.  3.  38. 
"  Here  was  he  merry  (a-)nearing  of  a  song." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  4. 

where  "hear  of"  does  not  mean,  as  with  us,  "hear  about."  So 
Lear,  v.  3.  204.  In  all  the  above  cases  the  verbal  means  "in  the 
act  of." 

In  most  cases,  however,  a  preposition  is  inserted,  and  thus  the 
substantival  use  of  the  verbal  is  made  evident.  Thus  : 

"  So  find  we  profit  by  losing  of  our  prayers." — A.  and  C.  ii.  I.  8. 
"  Your  voice_/&r  crowning  of  the  king." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4.  29  ;  Hamlet,  i.  5.  175  ;  Ltar,  i.  3.  1. 
"  With  halloing  and  singing  of  anthems." — 2  Hen.  IV.  \.  2.  213. 
"  What,  threat  you  me  with  telling  of  the  king?" 

Rich.  III.  L  3.  113. 
"  About  relieving*/  the  sentinels."— I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  I.  70  ;  iii.  4.  29. 

If  it  be  asked  why  "the"  is  not  inserted  before  the  verbal, — 
e.g.  "about  the  relieving  of  the  sentinels," — the  answer  is  that 
relieving  is  already  defined,  and  in  such  cases  the  article  is  generally 
omitted  by  Shakespeare.  (See  89.) 


1 18  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

When  the  object  comes  before  the  verbal,  of  must  be  omitted  : 
41      Ophelia.  Hamlet  .  .  .  shaking  of  mine  arm 

And  thrice  his  head  thus  waving.  —Hamlet,  ii.  I.  92. 
The  reason  is  obvious.     We  can  say  "  in  shaking  of  mine  arm," 
but  not  "  in  his  head  thus  waving." 

Compare  C.  ofE.v.  1. 153  ;  A.  Y.  L.  ii.  4.  44,  iv.  3.  10  ;  W.  T.  iii. 
3.  69  ;  I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  166  ;  R.  and  J.  v.  I.  40. 

"  Yet  the  mother,  if  the  house  hold  of  our  lady."— ASCH.  40. 
"  Hold,"  by  itself,  would  mean  "  actually  hold  "  (capiat).    "  Hold 
of"  means  "be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  hold"  (capax  sit),  "hold- 
ing of." 

179.  Of  is  sometimes  redundant  before  relatives  and  relatival 
words  in  dependent  sentences,  mostly  after  verbs  intransitive. 

"  Make  choice  of  which  your  highness  will  see  first." 

M.  N.  D.  v.  I.  43. 
"  What  it  should  be  ...  I  cannot  dream  of." 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  10. 
"  Making  just  report 
Of  how  unnatural  and  bemadding  sorrow 
The  king  hath  cause  to  plain. " — Lear,  iii.  2.  38. 
"  He  desires  to  know  of  you  of  whence  you  are," 

P.  of  T.  ii.  3.  80. 

where,  however,  "whence"  is,  perhaps,  loosely  used  for  "what 
place,"  and  of  strictly  used  for  "  from." 

The  redundant  and  appositional  of,  which  we  still  use  after 
"  town,"  "city,"  "valley,"  &c.,  is  used  after  "river"  (as  sometimes 
by  Chaucer  and  Mandeville)  in 

"  The  river  of  Cydnus."— A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  192. 

180.  On,  upon  (interchanged  in  E.  E.  with  "  an  "),  represents 
juxtaposition   of  any  kind,    metaphorical  or  otherwise.     It  was  in 
Early  English  a  form  of  the  preposition  "an"  which  is  used  as  an 
adverbial  prefix  (see  141)  ;  and  as  late  as  Ascham  we  find — 
"  I  fall  on  weeping." — ASCH.  iii.  4. 
"For  sorrow,  like  a  heavy-hanging  bell 

Once  set  on  ringing,  with  his  own  weight  goes. " — R.of ' L.  1494. 
Compare  also  our  a-head  with 

"  Hereupon  the  people  ran  on-head  in  tumult  together." — N.  P.  191. 
"Why  runnest  thou  thus  on  head?" — Homily  on  Matrimony. 


PREPOSITIONS.  119 

The  metaphorical  uses  of  this  preposition  have  now  been  mostly 
divided  among  of,  in,  and  at,  &c.     We  still,  however,  retain  the 
phrase,   "on  this,"   "on  hearing  this,"  &c.  where  on  is   "at  the 
time  of,"  or  "  immediately  after."     But  we  could  not  say — 
"Here  comes  (333)  the  townsmen  on  (in)  procession." 

2  Hen.  VL  ii.  i.  68. 
"Read  on  (in)  this  book. "— Hamlet,  iii.  i.  44.     So  MON- 

TAIGNE,  227  :  "To  read  on  some  book." 
"  Blushing  0«  (at)  her."— R.  of  L.  st.  453. 
"  On  (at)  a  moderate  pace."—  T.  N.  ii.  2.  3. 
"  The  common  people  being  set  on  a  broile." — N.  P.  190. 
(Comp.  our  "  set  on  fire.") 

"Horses  on  ('in'  or  'of')  a  white  foam." — N.  P.  186. 
"On  (of)  the  sudden."— Hen.  VIII.  iv.  2.  96. 
"And  live  to  be  revenged  on  ('for'  or  'about ')  her  death." 

R.  ofL.  1778. 

"  Be  not  jealous  on  (of)  me." 
"  Fond  on  her. "—Af.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  266. 
"Nod  on  (at)  him." -J.  C.  i.  2.  118. 
"  Command  upon  me. " — Macbeth,  iii.  j.  17. 
On,  like   "upon,"  is  used  metaphorically  for  "in  consequence 
of"  in 

"  Lest  more  mischance 
On  plots  and  errors  happen. " — Hamlet,  v.  2.  406  ; 

for  ' '  in  dependence  on  "  in 

"  I  stay  here  on  my  bond." — M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  242. 

In  "  She's  wandering  to  the  tower 

On  pure  heart's  love  to  greet  the  tender  princes,'" 

Rich.  III.  iv.  i.  4. 

there  is  a  confusion  between  "on  an  errand  of  love"  and  "out  of 
heart's  love." 

181.  On  is  frequently  used  where  we  use  "of"  in  the  sense  of 
"about,"  &c.  Thus  above,  "jealous  on,"  and  in  Sonn.  84,  "  Fond 
on  praise."  In  Early  English  (Stratmann)  we  have  "  On  witch- 
craft I  know  nothing."  "  What  shall  become  on  me?"  "  Denmark 
won  nothing  on  him."  Compare — 

"  Enamour'd  on  his  follies." — I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  71. 
"  His  lands  which  he  stood  seized  on."*— Hamlet,  L  i.  88. 
•  Globe,  "of." 


120 


SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 


"  Or  have  we  eaten  on  the  insane  root  ?  " — Macbeth,  i.  3.  84. 
"He  is  so  much  made  on  here." — Coriol.  iv.  5.  203. 
"What  think  you  on't." — Hamlet,  i.  I.  55. 
Note  the  indifferent  use  of  on  and  "of"  in 
"  God  have  mercy  on  his  soul 
And  of  all  Christian  souls.  "—Hamlet,  iv.  $.  200. 

The  use  of  on  in 

"  Intended  or  committed  was  this  fault  ? 
If  on  the  first,— I  pardon  thee,"— Rich.  II.  v.  3.  34. 

is  illustrated  by 

"My  gracious  uncle,  let  me  know  my  fault, 
On  what  condition  stands  it." — Ib.  ii.  3.  107. 

182.  On,  being  thus  closely  connected  with  "  of,"  was  frequently 
used  even  for  the  possessive  "of,"  particularly  in  rapid  speech 
before  a  contracted  pronoun. 

"One  en's  ears."— Coriol.  ii.  2.  85.  So  Coriol.  i.  3.  72  ;  u. 
i.  202. 

"The  middle  on's  fact."— Lear,  iv.  5.  20. 

"Two  on's  daughters."— 70.  i.  4.  114. 

"Tvfoon's."—  Cymb.  v.  5.  311. 

"My  profit  on't"— Temp.  i.  2.  365,  456. 

"You  lie  out  on't,  sir."— Hamlet,  v.  i.  132  ;  Lear,  iv.  I.  52. 

"  He  shall  hear  on't"— B.  J.  E.  in  &>c. 

"I  am  glad  orft."—J.  C.  i.  3.  137. 

In  the  two  last  examples  on  may  perhaps  be  explained  as  meaning 
"concerning,"  without  reference  to  "of." 

The  explanation  of  this  change  of  "of"  to  "  on  "  appears  to  be  as 
follows.  "  Of  "  when  rapidly  pronounced  before  a  consonant  became 
"o'." 

"Body  o'  me."— //<•«.  VIII.  v.  2.  22. 
"  O'  nights."—  T.  N.  i.  3.5. 

Hence  the  o1  became  the  habitual  representative  of  "of"  in  collo- 
quial language,  just  as  " a- "  became  the  representative  of  "on "  or 
"an."  But  when  o'  came  before  a  vowel,  what  was  to  be  done? 
Just  as  the  "a-"  was  obliged  to  recur  to  its  old  form  "an"  before 
a  vowel  or  mute  h  (compare  Hamlet,  i.  4.  19,  "to  stand  an-end" 
and  see  24),  so  before  a  vowel  o'  was  forced  to  assume  a  euphonic 
n.  (Compare  the  Greek  custom. ) 


PREPOSITIONS.  121 

And  even  when  the  pronoun  is  not  contracted,  we  find  in  Coriol. 
iv.  5.  174,  the  modern  vulgarism — 
"Worth  six  on  him." 
"To  break  the  pate  on  thee."— I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  I.  34. 

183.  Out  (out  from)  is  used  as  a  preposition  like  forth. 

"  You  have  push'd  out  your  gates  the  very  defender  of  them." 

Coriol.  v.  2.  41. 
(Early  Eng.  "  Come  out  Ireland,"  "  Out  this  land.") 

"  Out  three  years  old." — Temp.  i.  2.  41,  "  beyond  three  years." 
Explained  by  Nares,  "  completely." 
From  out.    See  157. 

184.  Till  is  used  for  to  : 

"  From  the  first  corse  //'//  he  that  died  to-day," 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  105. 

where  probably  //'//  is  a  preposition,  and  " he "  for  "him. "   See  He. 
"Lean'd  her  breast  up  //'//  a  thorn." — P.  P.  st.  21. 

Early  Eng.  "  He  said  thus  /;'/  (to)  him,"  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
"  To  (till)  we  be  gone."     So  "unto"  in  Chaucer  for  "until." 

"I  need  not  sing  this  them  until  (for  '  unto  them')." 

HEY  WOOD. 
"  We  know  where**;///'/  (whereto)  it  doth  amount." 

L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  494. 
"  And  hath  shipped  me  in//7  (into)  the  land." — ffamlett\.  1. 81. 

185.  To*  (see  also  Verbs,  Infin.).      Radical  meaning  motion 
tmvards.     Hence  addition.     This  meaning  is  now  only  retained  with 
verbs  implying  motion,  and  only  the  strong  form  "too"  (comp.  oj 
and  off]  retains  independently  the  meaning  of  addition.      But  in 
Elizabethan  authors  too  is  written  to,  and  the  prepositional  meaning 
"  in  addition  to  "  is  found,  without  a  verb  of  motion,  and  sometimes 
without  any  verb. 

"  But  he  could  read  and  had  your  languages 

And  tot  as  sound  a  noddle,"  &c.  —  B.  J.  Fox,  ii.  I. 
"  If  he  ...  to  his  shape,  were  heir  of  all  this  land." 

K.  J.  i.  I.  144. 
*  Comp.  irpot  throughout. 


122  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"And  to  that  dauntless  temper  of  his  mind 
He  hath  a  wisdom  that  doth  guide  his  valour. " 

Macbeth,  iii.  i.  52. 

i.e.  "in  addition  to  that  dauntless  temper."     To,  in  this  sense,  has 
been  supplanted  by  "beside."     Compare  also 

"  Nineteen  more,  to  myself."— B.  J.  E.  in  &c.  iv.  5. 
To  is  used  still  adverbially  in  "to  and  fro,"  and  nautical  expres- 
sions such  as  "heave  to,"  "come  to"  This  use  explains  "Go  to," 
M.  of  V.  ii.  2.  169.  "Go"  did  not  in  Elizabethan  or  E.  E.  neces- 
sarily imply  motion  from,  but  motion  generally.  Hence  "go  to" 
meant  little  more  than  our  stimulative  "  come,  come." 

186.  To  hence  means  motion,  "with  a  view  to,"  "for  an  end,"  &c. 
This  is  of  course  still  common  before  verbs,  but  the  Elizabethans 
used  to  in  this  sense  before  nouns. 

"  He  which  hath  no  stomach  to  this  fight.  "—Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  35. 

"  F»r  to  that  (to  that  end) 
The  multiplying  villanies  of  Nature 
Do  swarm  upon  him." — Macbeth,  \.  2.  10. 
" Prepare  yourself  to  death. "-W.  T.  iii.  I.  167. 
"Arm  you  to  the  sudden  time." — K.  J.  v.  6.  26. 
"  The  impression  of  keen  whips  I  'Id  wear  as  rubies 
And  strip  myself  to  (for)  death  as  to  a  bed." 

M.for  M.  ii.  4.  102. 

"  Giving  to  you  no  further  personal  power 
To  (for  the  purpose  of)  business  with  the  king." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  37. 

"  Pawn  me  to  this  your  honour."—/:  A.  i.  I.  147. 
"Few  words,  but,  to  effect,  more  than  all  yet." 

Lear,  iii.  I.  52. 
"He  is  frank'd  up  to  fatting  for  his  pains." 

Rich.  III.  i.  3.  314. 
Hence  it  seems  used  for/or  in 

"  Ere  I  had  made  a  prologue  to  my  brains 

They  had  begun  the  play." — Hamlet,  v.  2.  30 
And  perhaps  in 

"  This  is  a  dear  manakin  to  you,  Sir  Toby." — T.  N.  iii.  2.  57. 
But  see  41 9  a,  for  this  last  example. 

187.  To  hence,  even  without  a  verb  of  motion,  means  "  motion 
to  the  side  of."    Hence  "motion  to  and  consequent  rest  near,"  as  in. 


PREPOSITIONS.  123 

"  Like  yourself 

Who  ever  yet  have  stood  to  charity.  "—Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  80. 
"  To  this  point  I  stand.  "—Hamlet,  iv.  5.  187. 
"1  beseech  you,  stand  to  me."— 2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  i.  70. 
i.e.  "  Come  and  stand  by  me,  help  me." 
Motion  against  in  : 

"The  lady  Beatrice  hath  a  quarrel  to  you." — M.  Ado,  ii.  I.  44. 
So  T.  N.  iii.  4.  248  ;  Coriol.  iv.  5.  113. 
Motion  to  meet: 

"  To  her  doom  she  dares  not  stand."— B.  and  F.  FairSh.  v.  i. 
Motion  toward: 

"  What  wouldst  thou  have  to  Athens  ?"—  T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  287. 
"  To  Milan  let  me  hear  from  thee  by  letters." 

T.  G.  of  V.  i.  i.  57. 

Hence  "by  the  side  of,"  "  in  comparison  with." 
"  Impostors  to  true  fear." — Macb.  iii.  4.  64. 

i.e.  "Impostors  when  brought  to  the  side  of,  and  compared  with, 
true  fear." 

"  There  is  no  woe  to  his  correction, 
Nor  to  his  service  no  such  joy  on  earth. " 

T.  G.  ofV.  ii.  4.  138,  139. 

"The  harlot's  cheek,  beautied  with  plastering  art, 
Is  not  more  ugly  to  the  thing  that  helps  it 
Than  is  my  deed  to  my  most  painted  word." 

Hamlet,  iil  I.  51-53. 

In     "  Treason  can  but  peep  to  what  it  would, 
Acts  little  of  his  will,"— Ib.  iv.  5.  125. 

either  to  means  "towards,"  an  unusual  construction  with  "peep," 
or  the  meaning  is  "  treason  can  do  nothing  more  than  peep  in 
comparison  with  what  it  wishes  to  do." 

"  Undervalued  to  tried  gold." — M.  of  V.  ii.  7.  53. 
Hence  "up  to,"  "in  proportion  to,"  "according  to." 

"The  Greeks  are  strong  and  skilful  to  their  strength." 

Tr.  ami  Cr.  i.  i.  7. 
" That  which  we  have  we  prize  not  to  the  worth." 

M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  220. 
"  To  's  power  he  would 
Have  made  them  mules. " — Coriol.  ii.  I.  2(32. 


124  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Perform'd  to  point  the  tempest  that  I  bade  thee." 

Temp.  i.  2.  194. 
' '  He  needs  not  our  mistrust,  since  he  delivers 

Our  offices  and  what  we  have  to  do 

Te  the  direction  just. " — Macb.  iii.  3.  4. 

Hence  "like." 

' '  My  lady,  to  the  manner  of  the  days, 
In  courtesy  gives  undeserving  praise. " — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  365. 

"  Looked  it  of  the  hue 

To  such  as  live  in  great  men's  bosoms?" — B.  J.  Sejan.  v.  I. 
"  This  is  right  to  (exactly  like)  that  (saying)  of  Horace." 

B.  J.  E.  out  &c.  ii.  I. 
To  seems  to  mean  "  even  up  to  "  in 

"And  make  my  senses  credit  thy  relation 
To  points  that  seem  impossible." — P.  of  T.  v.  2.  125. 

188.  To  is  sometimes  used  without  any  sense  of  motion  for 
"near." 

"  It  would  unclog  my  heart 
Of  what  lies  heavy  to  't."—Coriol.  iv.  2.  48. 
"  Sits  smiling  to  my  heart." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  124. 
for  "by "in 

"  Where  ...  the  best  of  all  her  sex 
Doth  only  to  her  worthy  self  abide."— B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  ii.  1. 

In  the  difficult  passage  ( W.  T.  iv.  4.  550) : 

"  But,  as  the  unthought  on  accident  is  guilty 
To  what  we  wildly  do." 

"Guilty"  seems  used  for  "responsible,"  and  chance  'is  said  to  be 
"responsible  to"  rashness  (personified).  (Or  is  to  "as  to"  i.e.  as 
regards  ?) 

In  N.  P.  175  there  is  "to  the  contrary,"  (but  this  is  a  translation 
of  "au  contraire,")  for  "on  the  contrary." 

To  is  inserted  after  "trust"  (whereas  we  have  rejected  it  in 
parenthetical  phrases,  probaby  for  euphony's  sake). 

"  And,  trust  to  me,  Ulysses, 
Our  imputation  will  be  oddly  poised." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  339. 

To  seems  "up  to,"  "as  much  as,"  in 

"  I'll  part  sooner  with  my  soul  of  reason  than  yield  to  one  foot 
of  land.  — B.  and  F.  Elder  Brother,  iii.  5. 


PREPOSITIONS.  125 

188a.  "To,"  with  Adjectives  signifying  obedience,  &c. 

To  is  still  used  in  the  sense  of  "  towards  "  after  some  adjectives,  such 
as  (i)  "gentle,"  (2)  "disobedient,"  (3)  "open."  But  we  could 
not  say 

(1)  "If  thou  dost  find  him  tractable  to  us." — Rich.  HI.  iii.  i.  174. 

(2)  "A  will  most  incorrect  (unsubmissive)  to  heaven." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  95. 
"The  queen  is  stubborn  to  justice. "—Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  122. 

(3)  "Penetrable  to  your  kind  entreats."— Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  225. 
"  Vulgar  to  sense."  * — Hamlet,  i.  2.  99. 

i.e.  "  open  to  ordinary  observation." 

Similarly  to  is  used  after  nouns  where  we  should  use  "against," 
"in  the  sight  of:" 

"  Fie  !  'tis  a  fault  to  heaven, 
A  fault  against  the  dead,  a  fault  to  nature, 
To  reason  most  absurd." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  103. 

189.  To,  from  meaning  "like,"  came  into  the  meaning  of 
"representation,"  "equivalence,"  "apposition."  (Comp.  Latin 
"  Habemus  Deum  amico. ") 

"I  have  a  king  here  to  my  flatterer."— Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  306. 

"To  crave  the  French  king's  sister 
To  wife  for  Edward."— 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  i.  81. 
"Now  therefore  would  I  have  thee  to  my  tutor." 

T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  i.  84. 
"Destiny  .  .  .  that  hath  to  instrument  this  lower  world." 

Temp.  iii.  2.  54. 
"And  with  her  to  dowry  some  petty  dukedoms." 

Hen.  V.  iii.  Prol.  31. 

"  Lay  their  swords  to  pawn."— M.   W.  of  W.  iii.  I.  113. 
"Had  I  admittance  and  opportunity  to  friend." — Cymb.  i.  4.  118. 
"  Tunis  was  never  graced  before  with 
Such  a  paragon  to  their  queen." — Temp.  ii.  I.  75. 

Compare  also  Macb.  iii.  3  ;  J.  C.  i.  5. 

"The  king  had  no  port  to  friend." — CLARENDON,  Hist.  7. 
"  A  fond  woman  to  my  mother  (i.e.  who  was  my  mother) 
taught  me  so." — WAGER. 

Thus  "to  boot"  means  "by  way  of,  or  for,  addition."    So  in  E.  E. 
"to  sooth"  is  used  for  "forsooth." 

*  So  " retentive  to"  J.  C.  i.  3.  95. 


126  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

190.  To,  in  the  phrase  "  I  would  to  God,"  may  mean  "  near,"  "  in 
the  sight  of;"  or  there  may  be  a  meaning  of  motion  :  "I  should 
desire  (even  carrying  my  desire)  to  God. "    In  the  phrase  "  He  that 
is  cruel  to  halves"  (B.  J.  Disc.  759),  to  means,  perhaps,  "up  to  the 
limit  of."     Possibly,  however,  this  phrase  may  be  nothing  but  a 
corruption  of  the  more  correct  idiom  "Would  God  that,"  which  is 
more  common  in  our  version  of  the  Bible  than  "  I  would."     The  to 
may  be  a  remnant  and  corruption  of  the  inflection  of  "would," 
"wokk;"  and  the  /may  have  been  added  for  the  supposed  neces- 
sity of  a  nominative.     Thus 

"  Now  wold/?  God  that  I  might  sleepen  ever." 

CHAUCER,  Monkfs  Tale,  14746. 

So  "  thou  wert  best "  is  a  corruption  of  "  it  were  best  for  thee." 

This  theory  is  rendered  the  more  probable  because,  as  a  rule,  in 
Wickliffe's  version  of  the  Old  Testament,  "  Wolde  God"  is  found 
in  the  older  MSS.,  and  is  altered  into  "we  wolden"  in  the  later. 
Thus  Genesis  xvi.  3  ;  Numbers  xx.  3  ;  Joshua  vii.  7  ;  Judges  ix.  29  ; 
2  Kings  v.  3  (Forshall  and  Madden,  1850).  However,  Chaucer 
has  "I  hoped  to  God"  repeatedly. 

To  was  used,  however,  without  any  notion  of  "motion  toward 
the  future  "  in  to-night  (last  night). 

"  I  afc/dream  to-night." ~ M.  of  V.  ii.  5. 18  ;  2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2. 31. 
So  in  E.  E.  "to  year"  for  "  this  year,"  "to  summer,"  &c.  Perhaps 
the  provincial  "I  will  come  the  night,  the  morn,"  &c.  is  a  corruption 
of  this  "to."  It  is,  indeed,  suggested  by  Mr.  Morris  that  to  is 
a  corruption  of  the  demonstrative.  On  the  other  hand,  to  in  E.  E. 
was  "often  used  with  a  noun  to  form  adverbs." — LAYAMON 
( Glossary). 

"  He  aras  to  >an  mid-nihte," — LAYAMON,  i.  324. 
is  used  for  "  he  arose  in  the  midnight." 

Unto,  like  To,  185,  is  used  for  "  in  addition  to  :" 

"  Unto  my  mother's  prayers  I  bend  my  knee." 

Rich.  II.  v.  3.  97. 

191.  Upon  ("for  the  purpose  of")  is  still  used  in  "upon  an 
errand,"  but  not,  as  in 

"  Upon  malicious  bravery  dost  thou  come  ?"—  Othello,  L  I.  100. 


PREPOSITIONS.  127 

We  should  use  "over"  in 

"  I  have  no  power  upon  you," — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  23. 
and  we  should  not  use  upon  in 

"  And  would  usurp  upon  my  watery  eyes."—  T.  A.  iii.  I.  269. 

"  Let  your  highness 

Command  upon  me." — Macbeth,  iii.  I.  17. 

though  after  "claim"  and  "demand"  upon  is  still  used.  So  "an 
attack  upon"  is  still  English,  but  not 

"  I  have  o'erheard  a  plot  of  death  upon  him." — Lfar,  iii.  6.  Ofi. 
nor     "  I  am  yours  .  .  .  upon  your  will  to  suffer." — A.   W.  iv.  4.  30. 

i.f.  "  in  dependence  on."  It  would  seem  that  the  metaphorical  use 
of  upon  is  now  felt  to  be  too  bold  unless  suggested  by  some  strong 
word  implying  an  actual,  and  not  a  possible  influence.  Thus 
"claim"  and  "demand"  are  actual,  while  "power"  may,  perhaps, 
not  be  put  in  action.  So  "attack"  and  "assault"  are  the  actual 
results  of  "plot."  Yet  the  variable  use  of  prepositions,  and  their 
close  connection  with  particular  words,  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that 
we  can  say,  "I  will  wait  upon  him,"  but  not 

"  I  thank  you  and  will  stay  upon  your  leisure." — A.  W.  iii.  5.  48. 

Even  here,  however,  our  "wait  upon"  means,  like  "call  upon,"  an 
actual  interview,  and  does  not,  like  "  stay  upon"  signify  the  "  staying 
in  hope  of,  or  on  the  chance  of,  audience." 
Upon  also  means  "  in  consequence  of." 

"  When  he  shall  hear  she  died  upon  (i.e.  not  '  after,'  but  '  in 
consequence  of")  his  words." — M.  Ado,  iv.  I.  225. 

"  And  fled  is  he  upon  this  villany."—  Ib.  v.  i.  258. 
"  Break  faith  upon  commodity." — K.  J.  it  I.  597. 
"  Thy  son  is  banish'd  upon  good  advice." — Rich.  II.  L  3.  233. 

In     "  You  have  too  much  respect  upon  the  world," 

M.  of  V.\.  i.  74. 

there  is  an  allusion  to  the  literal  meaning  of  "respect."  "You 
look  too  much  upon  the  world."  The  upon  is  connected  with 
"respect,"  and  is  not  used  like  our  "for"  in  "I  have  no  respect 
for  him." 

The  use  of  "upon"  to  denote  "at"  or  "immediately  after"  is 
retained  in  "upon  this  ;"  but  we  could  not  say 

"  You  come  most  carefully  upon  your  hour." — Ifamlet,  i.  1.6. 


128  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

192.  Upon  is  often  used  like  on  adverbially  after  the  verb  "  look."' 
"Nay,  all  of  you  that  stand  and  look  upon."— Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  237. 
"  Why  stand  we  like  soft-hearted  women  here 

And  look  upon,  as  if,"  &c.— 3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  3.  27. 
"  Strike  all  that  look  upon  with  marvel,  come." — W.  T.  v.  3.  100. 
' '  Near  upon  "  is  adverbial  in 

"  And  very  near  upon 

The  duke  is  entering." — M.  for  M.  iv.  6.  14. 
"  Indeed,  my  lord,  it  followed  hard  upon" — Hamlet,  \.  2. 179. 
Upon,  from  meaning  superposition,  comes  to  mean  "in  accord- 
ance with"  (like  "after")  : 

"  Upon  my  power  I  may  dismiss  this  court." 

M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  104. 

193.  With  (which,  like  "by,"  signifies  juxtaposition)  is  often 
used  to  express  the  juxtaposition  of  cause  and  effect. 

"I  live  with  (on)  bread  like  you"— Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  175. 
We  could  say  "he  trembles  with  fear,"  "fear"  being  regarded 
as  connected  with  the  trembler,  but  not 

"  My  inward  soul 

With  nothing  trembles  :  at  something  it  grieves 
More  than  with  parting  from  my  lord  the  king." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  12,  13. 
"  As  an  unperfect  actor  on  the  stage 
Who  with  his  fear  is  put  besides  his  part. " — Sonn.  23. 

We  should  say  "*«  his  fear"  (or  "by  his  fear,"  personifying 
Fear)  ;  or  append  the  clause  to  the  verb,  "put  beside  his  part  with 
fear." 

"  It  were  a  better  death  than  die  with  mocks, 
Which  is  as  bad  as  die  with  tickling." — M.  Ado,  iii.  I.  79,  80. 

"Another  choaked  with  the  kernell  of  a  grape,  and  an  emperour 
die  by  the  scratch  of  a  combe,  and  Aufidius  with  stumbling  against 
the  doore,  and  Lepidus  with  hitting  his  foot." — MONTAIGNE,  32. 

Here  the  use  of  "by"  seems  intended  to  distinguish  an  external 
from  an  internal  cause. 

We  say  "so  far  gone  in  fear,"  but  not 

"  Thus  both  are  gone  with  conscience  and  remorse." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  3.  20. 
"This  comes  with  seeking  you." — T.  N.  Hi.  4.  366. 


! 


PREPOSITIONS.  129 

"I  feel  remorse  in  myself  with  his  words." — 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  7.  111. 
More  rarely,  with  is  used  with  an  agent  : 

"  Rounded  in  the  ear 

With  that  same  purpose-changer,  that  sly  devil."—  K.  J.  ii.  I.  567. 
"  We  had  like  to  have  had  our  two  noses  snapped  off  with  two 
old  men  without  teeth."— M.  Ado,  v.  I.  116. 

"Boarded  with  a  pirate." — 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  9.  33. 
"Pie  was  torn  to  pieces  with  a  bear." — W.  T.  v.  2.  66. 
"  Assisted  with  your  honoured  friends." — Ib.  v.  I.  13. 
This  explains 

"  Since  I  am  crept  in  favour  with  myself 
I  will  maintain  it  with  some  little  cost." — Rich.  III.  \.  2.  260. 

The  obvious  interpretation  is,  "since  I  have  crept  into  the  good 
graces  of  myself ;"  but  the  second  line  shows  the  "I"  to  be  superior 
to  "myself,"  which  is  to  be  maintained  by  the  "I."  The  true 
explanation  is,  "since  I  have  crept  into  (Lady  Anne's)  favour  with 
the  aid  of  my  personal  appearance,  I  will  pay  some  attention  to  my 
person."  Add,  probably,  Hamlet,  iii.  2.  207. 
This  meaning  is  common  in  E.  E. : 

"  He  was  slayn  wy\>  (by)  Ercules." 

R.  OF  BRUNNE,  Chron.  i.  12.  340. 
With  =  "by  means  of." 

"  He  went  about  to  make  amends  with  committing  a  worse  fault." 
— N.  P.  176,  where  the  French  is  "par  une  autre."  So  N.  P.  176. 

With  —  "in  addition  to,"  even  when  there  are  not  two  nouns  to 
be  connected  together  : 

"Very  wise  and  with  his  wisdome  very  valiant."— N.  P.  664. 

With  is,  perhaps,  used  for  "as  regards,"  "in  relation  to,"  as  in 
our  modern  "  this  has  not  much  weight  with  me,"  in 

"  Is  Caesar  with  Antonius  priz'd  so  slight  ?" — A.  and  C.  i.  I.  56. 
though  here,  perhaps,  as  above,  with  may  mean  "  by."  At  all 
events  the  passage  illustrates  the  connection  between  "with "and 
"by."  Compare 

"  His  taints  and  honours 

Wag'd  equal  with  (i.e.  in)  him." — A.  and  C.  v.  I.  31. 
"So  fond  with  gain."— A',  of  L.  134. 

194.  With  is  hence  loosely  used  to  signify  any  connection  with 
an  action,  as  in  "to  change  with"  (MONTAIGNE,  233),  where  we 
should  say  "to  exchange  for."     So,  though  we  still  say  "I  parted 
K 


130  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

with  a  house,"  or  "with  a  servant  (considered  as  a  chattel),"  we 
could  not  say 

"When  you  parted  with  the  king."— Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  2. 
"  As  a  long-parted  mother  with  her  child." 

Ib.  iii.  2.  8  ;  Rich.  III.  i.  4.  251. 
where  with  is  connected  with  parting.     See  419  a.     So 
"  I  rather  will  suspect  the  sun  with  cold 

Than  thee  with  wantonness. " — M.  W.  of  W.  iv.  4.  5. 
as  we  say  "  I  charge  him  with." 

' '  Next  them,  with  some  small  distance,  follows  a  gentleman  bear- 
ing the  purpose." — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4,  stage  direction. 

"  Equal  with,"  3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2. 137,  is  like  our  "  level  with"    In 
"  The  violence  of  either  grief  or  joy 
Their  own  enactures  with  themselves  destroy," 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  207. 
"  with  themselves"  seems  to  mean  "by  or  of  themselves." 

Note  "  They  have  all  persuaded  with  him.  "—M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  283. 
i.e.  "argued  with."  So  "flatter"  is  used  for  "deal  flatteringly" 
in  T.  N.  i.  5.  322,  and  in  the  first  of  the  following  lines  : 

"  K.  Rich.  Should  dying  men  flatter  with  those  that  live? 
Gaunt.  No,  no,  men  living  flatter  those  that  die." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  88,  89. 

"(She)  married  with  my  uncle." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  151. 
"  I  will  break  with  her."— M.  Ado,  i.  I.  311. 
i.e.  "  open  the  matter  in  conversation  with." 

195.  With  is  used  by  Ben  Jonson  for  like. 

"  Not  above  a  two  shilling. 

B.  'Tis  somewhat  with  the  least." — B.  J.  E.  in  &c.  i.  4. 
M  Something  like,  very  near  the  least. " 

""He  is  not  with  himself." — T.  A.  i.  I.  368.  i.e.  "in  his  senses. " 
Ben  Jonson  also  uses  without  in  the  sense  of  "unlike,"  "beyond." 
"An  act  without  your  sex,  it  is  so  rare." — B.  J.  Sejan.  ii.  I. 

196.  Withal,  the  emphatic  form  of  "  with  "  (see  "  all"),  is  used 
for  with  after  the  'object  at  the  end  of  a  sentence.     Mostly,  the 
object  is  a  relative. 

"  These  banish'd  men  that  I  have  kept  withal." 

T.  G.  of  V.  v.  4.  152. 
i.e.     "  With  whom  I  have  lived."— K.  J.  iii.  I.  327. 


PREPOSITIONS.  131 

"And  this  is  false  you  burden  me  withal."— C.  of  E.  v.  I.  268. 
i.e.  "this  with  which  you  burden  me." 

"  Such  a  fellow  is  not  to  be  talk'd  withal"— M. for M.  v.  I.  347. 
Sometimes  "this"  is  understood  after  withal,  so  that  it  means 
"with  all  this,"  and  is  used  adverbially  : 

"  So  glad  of  this  as  they  I  cannot  be 

Who  are  surprised  withal." — Temp.  iv.  I.  217. 
i.e.    "surprised  with,   or  at,   this."     Here  however,   perhaps,  and 
elsewhere  certainly,  with  means  "in  addition  to,"  and  "™#//-all 
(this)"  means  "besides." 

"  I  must  have  liberty  withal." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  48. 
"  Adding  withal."— Rich.  If.  iv.  I.  18,  &c. 

But  in  "  I  came  hither  to  acquaint  you  withal,"— A.  Y.  L.\.  I.  136. 
there  is  no  meaning  of  "besides,"  and  withal  means  "there- 
with," "with  it." 

Withal  follows  its  object,  but  is  (on  account  of  the  "all"  at  the 
end  of  the  previous  verse)  not  placed  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  in 
"  Even  all  I  have,  yea,  and  myself  and  all 
Will  I  withal  endow  a  child  of  thine.  "—Rich.  III.  iv.  4. 249. 

197.  Without  (used  locally  for  "  outside  "). 

"  What  seal  is  that  that  hangs  without  thy  bosom?" 

Rich.  II.  v.  I.  56. 

"  #7//«7«/ the  peril  of  the  Athenian  law."—  M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  150. 
"  A  mile  without  the  town." — Ib.  i.  i.  104. 
This  explains  the  pun  : 

"  Val.   Are  all  these  things  perceived  in  me  ? 
Speed.  They  are  all  perceived  without  ye." — T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  I.  35. 

Reversely,  "out  of"  is  used  metaphorically  for  "without." 

"  Neither  can  anything  please  God  that  we  do  if  it  be  done  out 
of  charity." — HALLIWELL. 

198.  Prepositions  are  frequently  omitted  after  verbs  of 

motion.     Motion  in : 

"To  ra-/the  streets  at  noon."* — A.  and  C.  i.  4.  20. 
•'She  wawdfcrVmany  a  wood." — SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  7.  28. 
"To  creep  the  ground."    "  Tower  the  sky. " — MILTON,  P.  L.  vil  441. 
*  "To  see  great  Pompey/<w.r  the  streets  of  Rome."— J.  C.  i.  i.  47. 


1 32  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Motion  to  or  from  : 

"  That  gallant  spirit  hath  aspired  the  clouds." 

R.  andj.  iii.  i.  122. 

"  Ere  we  could  arrive  the  point  proposed." — J.  C.  i.  2.  110. 
"  Arrived  our  coast. " — 3  Hen.   VI.  v.  3.  8. 
"  Some  sailors  that  escaped  the  wreck." — M.  of  V.  iii.  I.  110. 
"When  we  with  tears  parted  Pentapolis. "— P.  of  T.  v.  3.  38. 
"Depart  the  chamber  and  leave  us." — 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  4.  91. 
"  To  depart  the  city."— N.  P.  190. 
"Since  presently  your  souls  must /art  your  bodies." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  i.  3. 

We  can  still  say  "to  descend  the  hill,"  but  not  "to  descend  the 
summit,"  nor 

"Some  (of  her  hair)  descended  her  sheav'd  hat." — L.  C.  31. 
These  omissions  may  perhaps  illustrate  the  idiom  in  Latin,  and 
in  Greek  poetry. 

Verbs  of  ablation,  such  as  "bar,"   "banish,"  "forbid,"  often 
omit  the  preposition  before  the  place  or  inanimate  object.     Thus 

"  We'll  bar  thee/rom  succession." — IV.  T.  iv.  4.  440. 
Or        "  Of-  succession."— Cymb.  iii.  3.  102. 
becomes    "  Bars  me  the  right." 

M.ofV.\\.\.\*'t  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  400  ;  A.  Y.  L.  i.  i.  20. 

Where  a  verb  can  take  either  the  person  or  thing  as  an  object,  it 

naturally  takes  an  indirect  object  without  a  preposition.     Compare 

"  Therefore  we  banish  you  our  territories." — Rich.  II.  i.  3. 139. 

198  a.  The  preposition   is   omitted  after  some  verbs  and 
adjectives  that  imply  "value,"  "worth,"  &c. 

"  The  queen  is  valued  thirty  thousand  strong." 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  14. 

"  Some  precepts  worthy  the  note." — A.   W.  iii.  5.  104. 
An  imitation  of  this  construction  is,  perhaps,  to  be  traced  in 

"  Guilty  so  great  a  crime." — B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iv.  I. 
The  omission  of  a  preposition  before  "good  cheap"  (A.-S.  cedp, 
"price,"  "bargain"),    I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  3.  50,  may  perhaps   be  thus 
explained  without   reference  to  the  French  "bon  marche."     And 
thus,  without  any  verb  or  adjective  of  worth, 

"  He  has  disgraced  me  and  hindered  me  half  a  million." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  i.  57. 


PREPOSITIONS.  133 

"  Semblative"  (unless  adverbial  [i])  is  used  with  the  same  con- 
struction as  "  like"  in 

"  And  all  is  semblative  a  woman's  part." — T.  N.  i.  4.  34. 

199.  The  preposition  is  also  sometimes  omitted  before  the  thing 
heard  after  verbs  of  hearing  : 

"To  listen  our  purpose." — M.  Ado,  iii.  I.  12. 
"List*  brief  tale."— Lear,  v.  3.  181. 
So  J.  C.  v.  5.  15  ;  HamUt,  i.  3.  30 ;  J.  C.  iv.  i.  41. 

"  Listening  their  fear."— Macbeth,  ii.  2.  28. 
Hence  in  the  passive, 

"  He  that  no  more  must  say  is  listened  more." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  9. 
"Hearken*  the  end."— 2 Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  305  ;  Temp.  i.  2.  122. 

200.  The  preposition  is  Omitted  after  some  verbs  which  can 
easily  be   regarded  as  transitive.     Thus  if  we  can  say   "plot  my 
death,"  there  is  little  difficulty  in  the  licence. 

"  That  do  conspire  (for)  my  death."— Rich.  III.  iii.  4.  62. 
"  (In)  Which  from  the  womb  I  did  participate." — T.N.  v.  1.245. 
"  She  complained  (about)  her  wrongs." — R.  of  L.  1839. 
"  And  his  physicians Jear  (for)  him  mightily." 

Rich.  III.  i.  i.  137. 

So  i  Hen.  IV.   iv.    I.   24 ;   T.  of  A.   ii.   2.   12 ;   T.  A.  ii.  3.  305  ; 
M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  29. 
This  explains 

"  O,  fear  me  not."—tfamlet,  i.  3.  52  ;  iii.  4.  7. 
"  That  he  would  labour  (for)  my  delivery. "—Rich.  III.  i.  I.  253. 
"  To  look  (for)  your  dead."— Hen.   V.  iv.  7.  76. 
"  I  must  go  look  (for)  my  twigs." — A.  IV.  iii.  6.  115. 
"  He  hath  been  all  this  day  to  look  (for)  you." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  5.  34. 
And  in  the  difficult  passage — 

"  O,  whither  hast  thou  led  me,  Egypt  ?     See 
How  I  convey  my  shame  out  of  thine  eyes 
By  looking  back  what  I  have  left  behind 
'Stroy'd  in  dishonour." — A.  and  C.  iii.  10.  53. 

While  turning  away  from  Cleopatra,  Antony  appears  to  say,  that 
he  is  looking  back  (for)  the  fleet  that  he  has  left  dishonoured  and 
destroyed. 

•  The  Globe  inserts  "at." 


134  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So    "  Scoffing  (at)  his  state."— Rich.  HI.  iii.  2.  163. 

"  Smile  you  (at)  my  speeches  as  I  were  a  fool !" — Lear,  ii.  2.  88. 
"  Thou  swear"  st  (by)  thy  gods  in  vain."—  Ib.  i.  I.  163. 
"  Yet  thus  far,  Griffith,  give  me  ^eave  to  speak  (of)  him." 

Hen.  VIII.  iv.  2.  32. 

Both  here  and  in  Z.  Z.  Z.  v.  2.  349  ;  Macbeth,  iv.  3.  159;  Z  N. 
i.  4.  20,  "speak"  is  used  for  describe.  In  Macbeth,  iv.  3.  154,  "'tis 
spoken"  is  used  for  "'tis  said."  Again,  "said"  is  used  for 
"called"  in 

"To  be  said  yen.  honest  man  and  a  good  housekeeper." 

T.  N.  iv.  2.  10  ;  so  Macbeth,  iv.  3.  210. 

"Talking  that"  is  used  like  "saying  that"  in  Tempest,  ii.  i.  96. 
"Speak,"  however,  in  R.  and  J.  iii.  I.  158,  "  SpaJ;e  him  fair" 
means  "  speak  to  :"  but  in  the  same  expression  M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  271 
it  means  "speak  of."  Similarly,  "whisper"  is  often  used  without 
a  preposition  before  a  personal  object. 

"  He  came  to  whisper  Wolsey."— Hen.  VIII.  i.  i.  179. 

"  They  whisper  one  another  in  the  ear."—  K.  J.  iv.  2.  189. 

"  Your  followers  I  will  whisper  to  the  business." 

W.  T.  i.  2.  437. 
Rarely,  "  whisper  her  ear. " — M.  Ado,  iii.  i.  4. 

In  some  cases,  as  in 

"  She  will  attend  it  better," 

T.  N.  i.  3.  27,  2.  453;  M.  of  V.  v.  4.  103. 
the  derivation  may  explain  the  transitive  use. 

"  Despair  thy  charm," — Macbeth,  v.  8.  13, 

is,  perhaps,  a  Latinism.    So  "sympathise,"  meaning  "suffer  with," 
is  used  thus  : 

"The  senseless  brands  will  sympathise 
The  heavy  accent  of  thy  moving  tongue." 

Rich.  II.  v.  I.  47. 

"Deprive,"  meaning  "take  away  a  thing  from  a  person,"  like 
"rid,"  can  dispense  with  "  of"  before  the  impersonal  object. 

:'  'Tis  honour  to  deprive  dishonour'd  life." — R.  of  L.  1186. 
This  explains  how  we  should  understand — 

"  Which  might  deprive  your  sovereignty  of  reason." 

Hamlet,  i.  4.  73. 

i.e.  "which  might  take  away  your  controlling  principle  of  reason." 
So,  perhaps,  "Frees  all  faults." — Tempest,  Epilogue,  18. 


PREPOSITIONS.  135 

This  seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  desire  of  brevity.  Compare 
the  tendency  to  convert  nouns,  adjectives,  and  neuter  verbs  into 
active  verbs  (290). 

201.  The  preposition  was  also  omitted  before  the  indirect 

object  of  some  verbs,  such  as  "say,"  "question,"  just  as  we  still 
omit  it  after  the  corresponding  verbs,  "tell"  and  "ask." 

"  Sayesf(to)  me  so,  friend?"—/:  of  Sh.  i.  2.  190. 

"  You  will  say  (to)  a  beggar,  nay."— Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  119. 

"  Still  questioned  (of)  me  the  story  of  my  \\k."— Othello,  i.  3.  129. 

In     "  Hear  me  a  word,"— Rich.  III.  iv.  4,  180. 
it  must  be  a  question  whether  me  or  word  is  the  direct  object.     In 

"I  cry  thee  mercy,"— Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  515. 

"mercy"  is  the  direct  object.  This  is  evident  from  the  shorter 
form 

"(I)  Cry  mercy. "—Rich. III.  v.  3.  224. 

After  "give,"  we  generally  omit  "to,"  when  the  object  of  "to  " 
is  a  personal  noun  or  pronoun.     But  we  could  not  write — 

"  A  bed-swerver,  even  as  bad  as  these 

That  (to  whom)  vulgars  (the  vulgar)  give  bold'st  titles. " 

W.  T.  ii.  I.  94. 
"  Unto  his  lordship,  (to)  whose  unwished  yoke 

My  soul  consents  not  to  give  sovereignty." — M.  N.  D.  i.  I.  81. 

Somewhat  similar  is 

"  This  'longs  the  text."—/",  of  T.  ii.  Gower,  40. 
for  "  belongs  (to)  the  text." 

202.  Preposition   omitted  in   adverbial  expressions  of  time, 
manner,  &c. 

"  Forbear  to  sleep  the  nights,  and  fast  the  days." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4,  118. 
This  is  illustrated  by  our  modern 

"  (Of)  What  kindot  man  is  he  ?"—  T.  N.  i.  5.  159. 
"  But  wherefore  do  not  you  a  mightier  way 
Make  war  upon  this  bloody  tyrant,  time  ?" — Sonn.  16. 

"  My  poor  country 
(Shall)  More  suffer,  and  more  sundry  ways,  than  ever." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  48  ;  so  Ib.  i.  3.  154. 
"  Revel  the  night,  rob,  murder,  and  commit 
The  newest  sins  the  newest  kind  ofivays." — 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  5.  126. 


136  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  And  ye  sad  hours  that  move  a  sullen  pace" 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iv.  I. 
"I  will  a  round  unvarnish'd  tale  deliver 
Of  my  whole  course  of  life  ;  what  drugs,  -what  charms, 
What  conjuration,  and  what  nightly  magic 
(For  such  proceeding  I  am  charg'd  withal) 
I  won  his  daughter."—  Othello,  i.  3.  91. 
"  How  many  would  the  peaceful  city  quit 
To  welcome  him  !     Much  more,  and  much  more  cause,  * 
Did  they  this  Harry."— Hen.  V.  v.  Prol.  34. 
"To  keep  Prince  Harry  in  continual  laughter  the  wearing  out  oj 
six  fashions,  which  is  four  terms." — 2  Hen.  IV.  v.  I.  84. 

"  Why  hast  thou  not  served  thyself  into  my  table  so  many  meals?" 
—  Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  45  :  -i.e.  "during so  many  meals." 
"  To  meet  his  grace  just  distance  'tween  our  armies." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  i.  225. 

"  That  I  did  suit  me  all  points  like  a  man."—  A.   Y.  L.  i.  I.  118. 
"  But  were  I  not  the  better  part  made  mercy." — Ib.  iii.  I.  2. 
"  And  when  such  time  they  have  begun  to  cry." — Coriol.  iii.  3.  19. 
"Where  and  what  time  your  majesty  shall  please." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  450. 
"  What  time  we  will  our  celebration  keep."—/:  N.  iv.  3.  $0. 

"  Awhile  they  bore  her  up, 
Which  time  she  chanted  snatches  of  old  tunes." — Ham.  iv.  7.  178. 

In  the  following  cases  it  would  seem  that  a  prepositional  phrase  is 
condensed  into  a  preposition,  just  as  "by  the  side  of"  (Chaucer, 
"  by 'side  Bathe")  becomes  "be-side,"  and  governs  an  object. 
"On  this  side  Tiber."— J.  C.  iii.  2.  254. 
"  Fasten'd  ourselves  at  either  end  the  mast."— C  of  E.  i.  I.  86. 
"  A  sheet  of  paper  writ  o'  both  sides  the  leaf."  —L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  8. 
"  On  each  side  her  the  Bishops  of  London  and  Winchester." 
Hen.   VIII.  iv.  I  (order  of  coronation}. 
"  She  is  as  forward  of  our  breeding  as 

She  is  in  the  rear  our  birth."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  522. 
"  Our  purpose"  seems  to  mean  "  for  our  purpose,"  in 
"Not  to  know  what  we  speak  to  one  another,  so  we  seem  to 
know,  is  to  know  straight,  our  purpose:  chough's  language,  gabble 
enough  and  good  enough. " — A.  W.  iv.  I.  21. 

This  seems  the  best  punctuation.  "  Provided  we  seem  to  know 
what  we  say  to  one  another,  ignorance  is  exactly  as  good  as  know- 
ledge, for  our  purpose." 

*  But  "  and  (there  was)  much  more  cause  "  may  be  a  parenthesis. 


PREPOSITIONS.  137 

Hence  the  use  of  this  for  "  in  this  way"  or  "  thus"  is  not  so  bold 
as  it  seems  : 

"  What  am  I  that  thou  shouldst  contemn  me  this  ? 
What  were  thy  lips  the  worse  for  one  poor  kiss  ?  " 

V.  and  A.  203. 

Perhaps,  however,  "  contemn"  is  confused  with  "  refuse."  But  this 
is  used  for  "thus"  in  E.  E. 

All  constantly  repeated  adverbial  expressions  have  a  tendency  to 
abbreviate  or  lose  their  prepositions.  Compare  "alive  "  for  "on 
live,"  "around"  for  "  in  round,"  "chance"  for  "perchance," 
"like  "  for  "belike,"  &c.  In  some  adverbial  expressions  the  pre- 
position can  be  omitted  when  the  noun  is  qualified  by  an  adjective, 
but  not  otherwise.  Thus  we  can  use  "  yester-day, "  "last  night," 
"this  week,"  adverbially,  but  not  "day,"  "night,"  "week," 
because  in  the  latter  words  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  how  time 
is  regarded.  In  O.  E.  the  inflections  were  sufficient  to  justify  an 
adverbial  use,  "day^r,"  "nighter."  (Compare  irvKr6t.)  But  the 
inflections  being  lost,  the  adverbial  use  was  lost  with  them. 

203.  Prepositions :  transposed.   (See  also  Upon.)  inA.-S. 

and  E.  E.  prepositions  are  often  placed  after  their  objects.  In  some 
cases  the  preposition  may  be  considered  as  a  separable  part  of  a 
compound  transitive  verb.  Thus  in 

"  Ne  how  the  Grekes  with  a  huge  route 
Three  times  riden  all  the  fire  aboute"— CHAUC.  C.  T.  2954. 

"ride  about"  may  be  considered  a  transitive  verb,  having  as  its 
object  "fire."  Naturally,  emphatic  forms  of  prepositions  were 
best  suited  for  this  emphatic  place  at  the  end  of  the  sentence  ;  and 
therefore,  though  "  to,"  "  tyll,"  "  fro,"  "  with,"  "  by,"  "fore,"  were 
thus  transposed,  yet  the  longer  forms,  "untylle,"  "before,"  "be- 
hind," "upon,"  "again,"  were  preferred.  Hence  in  the  Elizabethan 
period,  when  the  transposition  of  the  weaker  prepositions  was  not 
allowed,  except  in  the  compound  words  "whereto,"  "herewith," 
&c.  (compare  "se-cum,  quo-cum")  the  longer  forms  are  still,  though 
rarely,  transposed. 

For  this  reason,  "with,"  when  transposed,  is  emphasized  into 
"withal."  The  prepositions  "after,"  " before, "  and  " upon, "  are 
thus  transposed  by  Shakespeare  : 

"  God  before"— Heii.  V.  i.  2.  307;  iii.  6.  55,  for  "'fore  God." 
"  Hasten  your  generals  after" — A.  and  C.  ii.  4.  2. 


j38  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So    "  I  need  not  sing  this  them  until  (unto)."— HEYWOOD. 
"  For  fear  lest  day  should  look  their  shames  upon." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  385. 
"  That  bare-foot  plod  I  the  cold  ground  upon." — A.  W.  iii.  4.  6. 

"For  my  good  will  is  to't, 
And  yours  it  is  against." — Tempest,  iii.  I.  31. 

The  use  of  prepositions  after  the  relative,  which  is  now  somewhat 
avoided,  but  is  very  common  in  E.  E.,  is  also  common  in  Shake- 
speare, and  is  evidently  better  adapted  to  the  metre  than  the  modern 
idiom,  as  far  as  regards  the  longer  forms.  "Upon  which"  is  not 
so  easily  metricized  as 

"  Ten  thousand  men  that  fishes  gnawed  upon" — Rich.  III.  i.  4.  25. 

"The  pleasure  that  some  fathers  feed  upon." — Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  79. 

204.  Prepositions  transposed.    "It  stands  me  upon."    This 

phrase  cannot  be  explained,  though  it  is  influenced,  by  the  custom  of 
transposition.  Almost  inextricable  confusion  seems  to  have  been 
made  by  the  Elizabethan  authors  between  two  distinct  idioms  :  (l) 
"it  stands  on"  (adv.),  or  "at  hand,"  or  "upon"  (comp.  "instat," 
irpoffTiKei),  i.e.  "it  is  of  importance,"  "it  concerns,"  "it  is  a  matter 
of  duty  ;"  and  (2)  "I  stand  upon"  (adj.),  i.e.  "  I  in-sist  upon." 

In  (l)  the  full  phrase  would  be,  "it  stands  on,  upon,  to  me," 
but,  owing  to  the  fact  that  "  to  me"  or  "  me  "  (the  dative  inflection)  is 
unemphatic,  and  "  upon  "  is  emphatic  and  often  used  at  the  end  of  the 
sentence,  the  words  were  transposed  into  "it  stands  me  upon." 
"Me"  was  thus  naturally  mistaken  for  the  object  of  upon. 

Hence  we  have  not  only  the  correct  form — 

"  It  stands  me  (dative)  much  upon  (adverb) 
To  stop  all  hopes."— Rich.  III.  iv.  2.  59. 

(So  Hamlet,  v.  2.  63,  where  it  means  "  it  is  imperative  on  me." 
But  also  the  incorrect — 

"  It  stands  your  grace  upon  to  do  him  right." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  138. 
"  It  only  stands 
Our  lives  upon  to  use  our  strongest  hands." — A.  and  C.  ii.  I.  51. 

where  "  grace"  and  "  lives"  are  evidently  intended  to  be  the  objects 
of  "upon,"  whereas  the  Shakespearian  use  of  "me"  (220)  renders 
it  possible,  though  by  no  means  probable,  that  "  me,"  in  the  first  of 
the  above  examples,  was  used  as  a  kind  of  dative. 


PRONOUNS.  139 

Hence  by  analogy — 

"  It  lies  you  on  to  speak. "—  Coriol.  iii.  2.  52. 

The  fact  that  this  use  of  upon  in  "stand  upon"  is  not  a  mere 
poetical  transposition,  but  a  remnant  of  an  old  idiom  imperfectly 
understood,  may  be  inferred  from  the  transposition  occurring  in 
Elizabethan  prose  : 

"  Sigismund  sought  now  by  all  means  (as  it  stood  him  upon)  to 
make  himself  as  strong  as  he  could." — NARES. 

Perhaps  this  confusion  has  somewhat  confused  the  meaning  of  the 
personal  verb  "  I  stand  on."  It  means  "  I  trust  in  "  (M.  W.  of  IV. 
ii.  i.  242),  "insist  on"  (Hen.  V.  v.  2.  93),  and  "I  depend  on" 
(R.  and  J.  ii.  2.  93),  and  in 

"The  moist  star 
Upon  whose  influence  Neptune's  empire  stands." 

Hamlet,  i.  i.  119. 


PRONOUNS. 

205.  Personal,  Irregularities  of  (omission  of,  insertion  of , 

see  Relative  and  Ellipses)-  The  inflections  of  Personal  Pro- 
nouns are  frequently  neglected  or  misused.  It  is  perhaps  impossible 
to  trace  a  law  in  these  irregularities.  Sometimes,  however,  euphony 
and  emphasis  may  have  successfully  contended  against  grammar. 
This  may  explain  /  in  "and  /,"  "but  /,"  frequently  used  for  me. 
"'Tween  you  and  /"  seems  to  have  been  a  regular  Elizabethan 
idiom.  The  sound  of  d  and  /  before  me  was  avoided.  Foi 
reasons  of  euphony  also  the  ponderous  thou  is  often  ungrammatically 
replaced  by  thee,  or  inconsistently  by  you.  This  is  particularly  the 
case  in  questions  and  requests,  where,  the  pronoun  being  especially 
unemphatic,  thou  is  especially  objectionable.  To  this  day  many  of  the 
Friends  use  thee  invariably  for  thou,  and  in  the  Midland  and  North 
of  England  we  have  "wilta?"  for  "wilt  thou?"  Compare  E.  E. 
"wiltow?"  for  "wilt  thou?"  "}>mkestow?"  for  "thinkest  thou?" 
and  similarly,  in  Shakespeare,  thou  is  often  omitted  after  a  ques- 
tioning verb.  Again,  since  he  and  she  could  be  used  (sec  below) 
for  "man"  and  "woman,"  there  was  the  less  harshness  in  using 
he  for  him  and  she  for  her.  Where  an  objective  pronoun  is  immedi- 
ately followed  by  a  finite  verb,  it  is  sometimes  treated  as  the  subject, 
as  below,  "  no  man  like  he  doth  grieve." 


140  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

206.  He  for  him : 

"  Which  of  he  or  Adrian,  for  a  good  wager,  begins  to  crow  ?" 

Tempest,  ii.  I.  28. 

Some  commentators  insert  " them  "  after  "which  of."     (See  408.) 
"  I  would  wish  me  only  he." — Coriol.  i.  I.  236. 
"  And  yet  no  man  like  he  doth  grieve  my  heart." 

R.  and  J.  iii.  5.  84. 

"  From  the  first  corse  till  he  that  died  to-day." — Ham.  \.  2.  104. 
where  "till"  is  a  preposition.     See  Prepositions,  Till,  184. 

207.  He   for   him  precedes  its  governing  verb  in  the  following 
examples  : 

"  Thus  he  that  over-ruled  I  over-sway'd. " — V.  and  A.  109. 

"  And  he  my  husband  best  of  all  affects.  "-M.  W.ofW.'w.^.  87. 

So  probably  he  depends  upon  "within  "  in 

"  Tis  better  thee  without  than  he  within."— Macbeth,  iii.  3.  14. 

208.  Him  for  he. 

Him  is  often  put  for  "he,"  by  attraction  to  "whom"  understood, 
for  "he  whom." 

"  Him  (he  whom)  I  accuse 

By  this  the  city  ports  hath  enter'd." — Coriol.  v.  6.  6. 
"  Ay,  better  than  him  (he  whom)  I  am  before  knows  me." 

A.   Y.  L.  i.  i.  46. 

"  When  him  (whom)  we  serve's  away." — A.  and C.  iii.  I.  15. 
"  Your  party  in  converse,  him  (whom)  you  would  sound, 

He  closes  with  you,"  &c.— Hamlet,  ii.  I.  42. 
Sometimes  the  relative  is  expressed  : 

"  His  brother  and  yours  abide  distracted — but  chiefly  him  that 
you  term'd  Gonzalo." — Temp.  v.  i.  14. 
Sometimes  he  is  omitted  : 

"  Whom  I  serve  above  is  my  master." — A.   W.  ii.  3.  26. 
"  To  (him  to)  whom  it  must  be  done."— 7.  C.  ii.  2.  331. 
In     "  Damn'd  be  him," — Macbeth,  v.  8.  34. 
perhaps  let,  or  some  such  word,  was  implied. 

209.  I  for  me  (for  euphony  :  see  205)  : 

"  Here's  none  but  thee  and  /."— 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  69. 

"  All  debts  are  cleared  between  you  and  f."—M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  321. 


PRONOUNS.  141 

"  You  know  my  father  hath  no  child  but  I"— A.  Y.  L.  i.  I.  46. 
"  Unless  you  would  devise  some  virtuous  lie 

And  hang  some  praise  upon  deceased  /. " — Sonn.  72. 
The  rhyme  is  an  obvious  explanation  of  the  last  example.     But, 
in  all  four,  /  is  preceded  by  a  dental. 

So  "  Which  may  make  this  island 

Thine  own  for  ever,  and  /,  thy  Caliban, 
For  aye  thy  foot-licker. "—  Tt-mJ).  iv.  I.  217. 

210.  Me  for  I: 

"  No  mightier  than  thyself  or  me. " — J.  C.  i.  3.  76. 
"Is  she  as  tall  as  me?"— A.  and  C.  iii.  3.  14. 
Probably  than  and  as  were  used  with  a  quasi-prepositiona)  force. 

211.  She  for  her : 

"Yes,  you  have  seen  Cassio  and  she  together. " — 0.  iv.  2.  K 
"  So  saucy  with  the  hand  of  she  here— what's  her  name  ?" 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  98. 

She  was  more  often  used  for  "woman"  than  "he"  for  "man." 
Hence,  perhaps,  she  seemed  more  like  an  uninflected  noun  than 
"  he  "  and  we  may  thus  extenuate  the  remarkable  anomaly 

"  Praise  him  that  got  thee,  she  that  gave  thee  suck." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  25. 

212.  Thee  for  tllOU,     Verbs  followed  by  thee  instead  of  thou 
have  been  called  reflexive.      But  though  "haste  thee"  and  some 
other  phrases  with  verbs  of  motion,  may  be  thus  explained,  and 
verbs  were  often  thus  used  in  E.  E.,  it  is  probable  that  "  look  thee,1' 
"hark  thee,"  are  to  be  explained  by  euphonic  reasons,      Thee,  thus 
used,  follows  imperatives  which,  being  themselves  emphatic,  require 
an  unemphatic  pronoun.     The  Elizabethans  reduced  thou  to  thee. 
We  have  gone  further,  and  rejected  it  altogether.    (See  205.) 

"Blossom,  speed  thee  well."—  W.  T.  iii.  3.  46. 

"  Look  thee  here,  boy."— Ib.  116. 

"  Run  thee  to  the  parlour." — M.  Ado,  iii.  i.  1. 

"  Haste  thee." — Lear,  v.  3.  251. 

"  Stand  thee  by,  friar."—  M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  24. 

"  Hark  thee  a  word."— Cymb.  i.  5.  32. 

"  Look  thee,  'tis  so." — T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  530. 

"  Come  thee  on." — A.  and  C.  iv.  7.  16. 


I42  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Now,  fellow,  fare  thee  well." — Lear,  iv.  6.  41. 

"  UolAthee,  there's  my  purse.  "—,4.  W.  iv.  5.  46 ;J.  C.  v.  3.  85. 

"  Take  thee  that  too." — Macbeth,  ii.  I.  5. 
In  the  two  latter  instances  thee  is  the  dative. 
Thee  is  probably  the  dative  in 

"IKafost  thee?"— Hamlet,  v.  2.  63. 

or,  at  all  events,  there  is,  perhaps,  confusion  between  "Thinks  it 
thee?"  i.e.  "does it  (E.E.)  seem  to  thee?"  and  "thinkst  thou  ?"  Very 
likely  "thinkst"  is  an  abbreviation  of  "thinks  it."  (See  297.) 
Compare  the  confusion  in 

"  Where  it  thinkst  best  unto  your  royal  selfe. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  63  (Folio). 

213.  Thee  for  thou  is  also  found  after  the  verb  to  be,   not 
merely  in  the  Fool's  mouth  : 

"I  would  not  be  thee,  nuncle." — Lear,  i.  4.  204. 
but  also  Timon  : 

"  I  am  not  thee."—T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  277. 
and  Suffolk  : 

"  It  is  thee  I  fear."— 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  117. 

where  thee  is,  perhaps,  influenced  by  the  verb,  "I  fear,"  so  that 
there  is  a  confusion  between  "It  is  thou  whom  I  fear"  and  "  Thee 
I  fear."  In  these  cases  thee  represents  a  person  not  regarded  as 
acting,  but  about  whom  something  is  predicated.  Hence  thou  was, 
perhaps,  changed  to  thee  according  to  the  analogy  of  the  sound  of 
he  and  she,  which  are  used  for  "man"  and  "  woman." 

214.  Them  for  they: 

"  Your  safety,  for  the  which  myself  and  them 
Bend  their  best  studies."— K.  J.  iv.  2.  50. 

Perhaps  them  is  attracted  by  "myself,"  which  naturally  suggests 
the  objective  "myself  and  (they)  them( selves)." 

215.  Us  for  we  in  "shall'.?."     "Shall"  (315),  originally  mean- 
ing necessity  or  obligation,  and  therefore  not  denoting  an  action  on 
the  part  of  the  subject,  was  used  in  the  South  of  England  as  an 
impersonal  verb.     (Compare  Latin  and  Greek.)     So  Chaucer,  "us 
oughte,"  and  we  also  find  "as  us  \vo\,"i.e.  "  as  it  is  pleasing  to  us." 
Hence  in  Shakespeare 


PRONOUNS.  143 

"  Say,  where  shallV  lay  him?" — Cymb.  iv.  3.  233. 
"Shall'j  have  a  play  of  this?"— Ib.  v.  5.  28. 
"Shall'-r  attend  you  there?" — W.  T.  i.  2.  178. 
"Shall'j-to  the  Capitol?"—  Coriol.  iv.  6.  148. 

216.  After  a  conjunction  and  before  an  infinitive  we  often  find 
/,  thou,  &c.,  where  in  Latin  we  should  have  "me,"  "te," 
&c.  The  conjunction  seems  to  be  regarded  as  introducing  a  new 
sentence,  instead  of  connecting  one  clause  with  another.  Hence  the 
pronoun  is  put  in  the  nominative,  and  a  verb  is,  perhaps,  to  be 
supplied  from  the  context. 

"  What  he  is  indeed 
More  suits  you  to  conceive  than  /(find  it  suitable)  to  speak  of." 

A.  Y.  L.  i.  2.  279. 
i.e.  "  than  that  I  should  speak  of  it." 

"A  heavier  grief  could  not  have  been  imposed 
Than  /to  speak  my  griefs  unspeakable." — C.  of  E.  i.  I.  33. 

"The  soft  way  which  thou  dost  confess 
Were  fit  for  thee  to  use  as  they  to  claim." — Coriol.  iii.  2.  82. 

"  Making  night  hideous,  and  we  fools  of  nature 
So  horridly  to  shake  our  disposition." — Hamlet,  i.  4.  54. 

"Heaven  would  that  she  these  gifts  should  have, 
And  I  \x>  live  and  die  her  slave." — A.   Y.  L.  iii.  2.  162. 

Sometimes  the  infinitive  is  implied,  but  not  expressed : 

"  To  beg  of  thee  it  is  my  more  dishonour 
Than  thou  of  them." — Coriol.  iii.  2.  125. 

/,  thou,  and  he,  are  also  used  for  me,  thee,  and  him,  when  they 
stand  quasi-independently  at  some  distance  from  the  governing  verb 
or  preposition. 

"  But  what  o'  that  ?  Your  majesty  and  we  that  have  free  souls, 
it  touches  us  not." — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  252. 

"I  shall  think  the  better  of  myself  and  thee  during  my  life;  / 
for  a  valiant  champion,  and  thou  for  a  true  prince." — I  Hen.  IV. 
ii.  4.  300. 

"  (God)  make  me  that  nothing  have  with  nothing  griev'd, 
And  thou  with  all  pleas'd  that  hast  all  achieved. " 

Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  217. 


"  With  that  same  purpose-changer,  that  sly  devil, 
That  daily  break-vow,  he  that  wins  of  all. "— K. 


J.  ii.  i.  568. 


144  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Now  let  me  see  the  proudest, 
He  that  dares  most,  but  wag  his  finger  at  thee. " 

Hen.  VIII.  v.  3.  131. 

(To  punctuate,  as  in  the  Globe,  "  the  proudest  he"  is  intolerably 
harsh.) 

"Justice,  sweet  prince,  against  that  woman  there, 
She  whom  thou  gavest  to  me  to  be  my  wife, 
That  hath  abused  and  dishonour'd  me."—  C.  of  E.  v.  I.  198. 
"Why,  Harry,  do  I  tell  thee  of  my  foes 
Which  art  my  near'st  and  dearest  enemy, 
Thou  that  art  like  enough,"  &c.  ?— I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  123. 

217.  His  was  sometimes  used,  by  mistake,  for  's,  the  sign  of  the 
possessive  case,  particularly  after  a  proper  name,  and  with  especial 
frequency  when  the  name  ends  in  s.  This  mistake  arose  in  very 
early  times.  The  possessive  inflection  's  (like  the  dative  plural 
inflection  urn)  was  separated  by  scribes  from  its  noun.  Hence  after 
the  feminine  name  "  Guinivere,"  we  have  in  the  later  text  of  LAYA- 
MON,  ii.  511,  "for  Gwenayfer  his  love."  The  h  is  no  more  a 
necessary  part  of  this  separate  inflection  than  it  is  of  "his,"  the 
third  pers.  sing,  indie,  pres.  of  "beon"  ("be").  "  His"  is  con- 
stantly found  for  "is"  in  Layamon.  No  doubt  the  coincidence  in 
sound  between  the  inflection  's  and  the  possessive  "his"  made  the 
separation  seem  more  natural,  and  eventually  confused  's  with  his. 

"  Mars  his  sword  .  .  .  nor  Neptune's  trident  nor  Apollo's  bow." 

B.  J.  Cy.'s  Rev.  i.  i. 
Also,  by  analogy, 

"  Pallas /«r  glass."—  BACON,  Adv.  of  L.  278. 
This  is  more  common  with  monosyllables  than  with  dissyllables, 
as  the  's  in  a  dissyllable  is  necessarily  almost  mute.     Thus 

"  The  count  his  gullies."— T.  N.  iii.  3.  26. 

"  Mars  his  true  moving. " — I  Hen.   VI.  i.  2.  1. 
So  Tr.  and  Cr.iv.  5.  176,  255,  &c. 

"  Charles  /$w  gleeks."— I  Hen.   VI.  iii.  2.  123. 
but  never,  or  very  rarely,  "  Phoebus  his." 

The  possessive  inflection  in  dissyllables  ending  in  a  sibilant  sound 
is  often  expressed  neither  in  writing  nor  in  pronunciation. 

"Many,  my  uncle  Clarence  (Folio)  angry  ghost." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  144 ;  ii.  i.  137. 


PRONOUNS.  145 

"  For  justice  sake. " — J.  C.  iv.  3.  19. 
"  At  every  sentence  end." — A.   Y.  L.  iii.  2.  144. 
"  Lewis"  is  a  monosyllable  in 

"King  Lewis  his  satisfaction  all  appear." — Hen.  V.  i.  2.  88. 
His  is  used  like  "hie"  (in  the  antithesis  between  " hie  .  .  .  ille  "). 
"  Desire  his  (this  one's)  jewels  and  this  other's  house."* 

Macb.  iv.  3.  80  ;  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  54-5  ;  Sonn.  xxix.  5,  6. 
This  explains 

"  And,  at  our  stamp,  here  o'er  and  o'er  one  falls  : 
He  murder  cries,  and  help  from  Athens  calls." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  i.  25. 
His,  being  the  old  genitive  of  ;'/,  is  almost  always  used  for  its. 

218.  His,  her,  &c.  being  the  genitives  of  he,  she  (she  in  E.  E. 
had,  as  one  form  of  the  nom.,  "  heo,"  gen.  "hire"),  &c.  may  stand 
as  the  antecedent  of  a  relative.  Thus  : 

"  In  his  way  that  comes  in  triumph  over  Pompey's  blood." 

J.  C.I  i.  55. 
i.e.   "in  the  way  of  him  that  comes." 

"  Love  make  his  heart  of  flint  that  you  shall  love."  —  T.  N.  i.  5.  305. 

"  Unless  -for  prayers  -whom  heaven  delights  to  hear." — A.  W.\\\.4t.efi. 

"  If  you  had  known  .  .  .  her  worthiness  that  gave  the  ring." 

M.  of  V.  v.  I.  200. 

"Armies  of  pestilence,  and  they  shall  strike 
Your  children  yet  unborn  and  unbegot 
That  lift  your  vassal  hands  against  my  head. " 

Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  89. 
i.e.  "the  children  of  you  who  lift  your  hands." 

"Upon  their  woes  whom  fortune  captivates." 

3  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  115.     So  Lear,  v.  3.  2. 
"  And  turn  our  impress'd  lances  in  our  eyes 

Which  do  command  them." — Lear,  v.  3.  50. 
In     "  Alas,  their  love  may  be  call'd  appetite, 
No  motion  of  the  liver,  but  the  palate, 
That  suffer  surfeit,  cloyment  and  revolt," — T.  N.  ii.  4. 100-2 
it  seems  better  to  take  that  as  the  relative  to  "them,"  implied  in 
"their  (of  them),"  rather  than  to  suppose  "suffer"  to  be  the  sub- 
junctive singular  (367),  or  that  to  be  the  relative  to  "liver"  and 
"palate"  by  confusion.     It  is  true  that  is  not  often  so  far  from  its 
antecedent,  but  the  second  line  may  be  treated  as  parenthetical. 

"  Condemning  some  to  death,  and  some  to  exile  ; 

Ransoming  hint,  or  pitying,  threatening  the  other. "—  Coriol  \.  6.  36. 


146  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

This  is  perhaps  not  common  in  modern  poetry,  but  it  sometimes 
occurs: 

"  Poor  is  our  sacrifice  -whose  eyes 

Are  lighted  from  above."— NEWMAN. 

219.  Your,  our,  their,  &c.,  are  often  used  in  their  old  signi* 
fication,  as  genitives,  where  we  should  use  "  of  you,"  &c. 

"  We  render  you  (Coriolanus)  the  tenth  to  be  ta'en  forth 

At ...  your  only  choice." — Coriol.  i.  9.  36. 
i.e.  "  at  the  choice  of  you  alone." 

"To  all  our  lamentation." — Coriol.  iv.  6.  34. 
i.e.  "  to  the  lamentation  of  us  all" 

"  Have  I  not  all  their  letters  to  meet  me  in  arms  ?" 

I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  3.  28. 
i.e.  "  letters  from  them  all" 

220.  Me,  thee,  him,  &c.  are  often  used,   in  virtue  of  their 
representing  the  old  dative,  where  we  should  use  for  me,  by  me,  &c. 
Thus: 

"  1  am  appointed  (by)  him  to  murder  you." — W.  T.  i.  2.  412. 
"John  lays  you  plots." — K.  J.  iii.  4.  145. 
This  is  especially  common  with  me. 
Me  is  indirect  object  in 

"  But  hear  me  this."— T:  N.  v.  I.  123. 

"  What  thou  hast  promis'd — which  is  not  yet  perform'd  me." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  244. 

We  say  "do  me  a  favour,"  but  not  "to  do  me  business." — 
Tempest,  i.  2.  255. 

"  Give  me  your  present  to  one  Master  Bassanio." 

M.  ofV.  ii.  2.  115. 

"  Who  does  me  ihis?"—ffam!et,  ii.  2.  601. 
"Sayest  thou  me  so?"— 2  Hen.   VI.  ii.  I.  109. 
Me  seems  to  mean  ' '  from  me  "  in 

"  You'll  bear  me  a  bang  for  that."— J.  C.  iii.  2.  20. 
"with  me"  in 

"And  hold  me  pace  in  deep  experiment." — I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  48. 
Me  means  "  to  my  injury"  in 

"  See  how  this  river  comes  me  cranking  in, 
And  cuts  me,  from  the  best  of  all  my  land, 
A  huge  half-moon." — i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  l.  100. 
"  at  my  cost"  and  "  for  my  benefit"  in 

"  The  sack  that  thou  hast  drunk  me  could  have  bought  me  lights 


PKONOUNS.  147 

as  good  cheap  at  the  dearest  chandler's  in  Europe." — i  Hen.  IV. 
iii.  3.  50. 

Me  in  narrative  stands  on  a  somewhat  different  footing  : 
"  He  pluck'd  me  ope  his  doublet."—^  C.  i.  2.  270. 
"  He  steps  me  to  her  trencher." — T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  9. 
"  The  skilful  shepherd  peel'd  me  certain  wands." 

M.ofV.  \.  3.85. 

"  He  presently,  as  greatness  knows  itself, 
Steps  me  a  little  higher  than  his  vow." — I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  75. 

Falstaff,  when  particularly  desirous  of  securing  the  attention  of 
the  Prince  ("Dost  thou  hear  me,  Hal?"),  indulges  twice  in  this 
use  of  me. 

"  I  made  me  no  more  ado,  ...  I  followed  me  close." 

i  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  233,  241. 

Here,  however,  the  verbs  are  perhaps  used  reflexively,  though 
this  would  seem  to  be  caused  by  the  speaker's  intense  desire  to  call 
attention  to  himself.  So  in 

"  Observe  me  judicially,  sweet  sir ;  they  had  planted  me  three 
demi-culverins," — B.  J.  E.  in  <&c.  iii.  2. 

the  me  seems  to  appropriate  the  narrative  of  the  action  to  the 
speaker,  and  to  be  equivalent  to  "mark  tnt,"  "/tell  you."  In 
such  phrases  as 

"  Knock  me  here," — T.  of  Sh.  i.  2.  8. 

the  action,  and  not  merely  the  narrative  of  the  action,  is  appro- 
priated. 

You  is  similarly  used  for  "  look  you  :" 

"  And  'a  would  manage  you  his  piece  thus,  and  come  you  in 
and  come  you  out" — 2  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  304. 

In         "  Study  me  how  to  please  the  eye  indeed 

By  fixing  it  upon  a  fairer  eye,  — L.  L.  L.  i.  I.  80. 
me  probably  means  "for  me,"  "  by  my  advice,"  i.e.  "/would  have 
you  study  thus."     Less  probably,  "  study"  may  be  an  active  verb, 
of  which  the  passive  is  found  in  Macb.  i.  4.  9. 
There  is  a  redundant  him  in 

"  The  king,  by  this,  is  set  him  down  to  rest." — 3 //<*«.  VI.  iv.  3.  2. 
where  there  is,  perhaps,  a  confusion  between  "has  set  him(self) 
down"  and  "  is  set  down." 

Her  seems  used  for  "  of  her,"  "  at  her  hands,"  in 

"I  took  her  leave  at  court."— A.   W  v.  3.  79. 
i.e.  "  I  bade  her  farewell." 

L  2 


I48  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Us  probably  is  used  for  "  to  us"  in 

"  She  looks  us  like 

A  thing  made  more  of  malice  than  of  duty." — Cymb.  iii.  5.  32. 
But  possibly  as  "look"  in  Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  76,  A.  and  C.  iii.  10.  53, 
is  used  for  "  look  for,"  so  it  may  mean  "  look  at."  So 

"Twa  brooks  in  which  I  look  myself." — B.  J.  Sad  Sh.  ii.  I. 
i.e.  "I  view  myself." 

Us  seems  equivalent  to  "for  us"  in 

"We  have  not  spoke  us  yet  of  torch -bearers. " 

M.  of  V.  ii.  4.  5. 
i.e.  "spoken  for  ourselves  about  torch-bearers." 

221.  Your,  like  "me"  above  (Latin,  iste\  is  used  to  appropriate 
an  object  to  a  person  addressed.     Lepidus  says  to  Antony  : 

"  Your  serpent  of  Egypt  is  lord  now  of  your  mud  by  the  operation 
of  your  sun  :  so  is  your  crocodile." — A.  and  C.  ii.  7.  29. 
Though  in  this  instance  the  your  may  seem  literally  justified,  the 
repetition   of   it  indicates   a   colloquial   vulgarity  which  suits   the 
character  of  Lepidus.     So  Hamlet,  affecting  madness  : 

"  Your  worm  is  your  only  emperor  for  diet ;  your  fat  king  and 
your  lean  beggar  is  but  variable  service." — Hamlet,  iv.  3.  24. 

Compare 

"  But  he  could  read  and  had  your  languages." — B.  J.  Fox,  ii.  I. 
i.e.  "  the  languages  which  you  know  are  considered  important." 

So:  "I  would  teach  these  nineteen  the  special  rules,  as  your 
punto,  your  reverse,  your  stoccata,  your  imbroccato,  your  passada, 
your  montanto. " — Bobadil,  in  B.  ].  E.  in  &c.  iv.  5. 

Hence  the  apparent  rudeness  of  Hamlet  is  explained  when  he 
says  to  the  player  : 

"  But  if  you  mouth  it  as  many  of  your  players  do." — Ham.  iii.  2.  3. 
i.f.  "the  players  whom  you  and  everybody  know." 

222.  Our  is  used,  like  "my,"  vocatively: 

"  Our  very  loving  sister,  well  be-met."—  Lear,  v.  I.  20. 
"  Tongue-tied  our  queen,  speak  thou." — W.  T.  \.  I.  27. 
"  Our  old  and  faithful  friend,  we  are  glad  to  see  you." 

M.forM.  v.  I.  2. 

In  all  these  cases  our  is  used  in  the  royal  style,  for  "my,"  by  a 
single  speaker  referring  merely  to  himself. 


PRONOUNS.  149 

223.  Him,  her,  me,  them,  &c.  .are  often  used  in  Elizabethan, 
and  still  more  often  in  Early  English,  for  himself,  herself,  &c. 

"  How  she  opposes  her  (sets  herself]  against  my  will." 

T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  2.  26. 

"  My  heart  hath  one  poor  string  to  stay  it  by."— A".  J.  v.  6. 55. 
"  And  so  I  say  I'll  cut  the  causes  off 
Flattering  me  with  impossibilities." — 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  143. 

224.  He  and  she  are  used  for  "man''  and  "woman." 

"  And  that  he 
Who  casts  to  write  a  living  line  must  sweat. " 

B.  J.  on  Shakespeare. 
"  I'll  bring  mine  action  on  the  proudest  he 

That  stops  my  way  in  Padua/'—  T.  of  Sh.  iii.  2.  236. 
"  Lady,  you  are  the  cruellest  she  alive." — T.  N.  i.  5.  259. 

"  I  think  my  love  as  rare 

As  any  she  belied  with  false  compare." — Sonn.  130. 
"  That  she  belov'd  knows  nought  that  knows  not  this." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  2.  314. 
"  With  his  princess,  she 

The  fairest  I  have  yet  beheld."— JT.  T.  v.  i.  86. 
"  Betwixt  two  such  shes."—Cytnb.  i.  6.  40 ;  ib.  i.  3.  29.* 

This  makes  more  natural  the  use  of  "he  that,"  with  the  third 
person  of  the  verb,  in 

"Are  not  you  he 

That  frights  the  maidens?" — M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  34. 
So  A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  411. 

225.  Pronoun  for  pronominal  adjective.    The  pronominal 

adjectives  his,  their,  being  originally  possessive  inflections  of  he, 
they,  &c.,  were  generally  used  in  E.  E.  possessively  or  subjectively, 
i.e.  "  his  wrongs  "  would  naturally  mean  then  "  the  wrongs  done  by 
him,"  not  "to  him."  Hence,  for  objective  genitives,  "of"  was 
frequently  introduced,  a  usage  which  sometimes  extended  to  sub- 
jective genitives.  Hence 

"  The  kindred  of  him  hath  been  flesh'd  upon  us."—J7en.  V.  ii.  4. 50. 
"Tell  thou  the  lamentable  tale  of  me"— Rich.  II.  v.  I.  44. 
"The  native  mightiness  and  fate  of  him  " — Hen.   V.  ii.  4.  64. 
"Against  the  face  of  them"— Psalm  xxi.  12. 
*   Hence  a  "  lady-jA*,"  W.  T.  i.  2.  44,  means  "  a  well-born  woman." 


1 50  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

It  is  used,  perhaps,  for  antithesis  in 

"  Let  her  be  made 
As  miserable  by  the  death  of  him 
As  I  am  made  by  my  poor  lord  and  thee." 

Rich.  III.  i.  2.  21. 

"  O  world,  thou  wast  the  forest  to  this  heart, 
And  this  indeed,  O  world,  the  heart  of  thee." 

J.  C.  iii.  i.  208. 

226.  It  is  sometimes  used  indefinitely,  as  the  object  of  a  verb, 
without  referring  to  anything  previously  mentioned,  and  seems  to 
indicate  a  pre-existing  object  in  the  mind  of  the  person  spoken  of. 

"Courage,  father,  fight  //out."— 3  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  10. 
i.e.  "the  battle." 

"  Ber.  She  never  saw  it. 
King.  Thou  speak'st  it  falsely.  "—A.   W.  v.  3.  113. 

i.e.  "  what  thou  sayest" 

"  Dangerous  peer, 
That  smooth'st  it  so  with  king  and  commonweal. " 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  22. 
where  it  =  "matters." 

"To  revel  it  with  him  and  his  new  bride."  (So  C.  of  E.  iv.  4.  66. ) 
—3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  225. 

i.e.  "to  take  part  in  the  intended  bridal  revels." 

"I  cannot  daub  it  further." — Lear,  iv.  I.  54. 
i.e.  "  continue  my  former  dissembling." 

But  it  is  often  added  to  nouns  or  words  that  are  not  generally 
used  as  verbs,  in  order  to  give  them  the  force  of  verbs. 

"Foot  it."—  Tempest,  i.  z.  380. 
"To  queen  it."— Hen.  VIII.  ii.  3.  37. 
"To prince  it." — Cymb.  iii.  4.  85. 
"  Lord  Angelo  dukes  it  well." — M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  100. 
And,  later, 

"  Whether  the  charmer  sinner  it  or  saint  it, 
If  folly  grow  romantic,  I  must  paint  it." 

POPE,  Moral  Essays,  ii.  15. 

The  use  of  it  with  verbs  is  now  only  found  in  slang  phrases. 


PRONOUNS.  151 

227.  It-is  sometimes  more  emphatically  used  than  with  us.     We 
have  come  to  use  it  so  often  superfluously  before  verbs  that  the 
emphatic  use  of  it  for  "  that"  before  "  which"  is  lost. 

"  There  was  it 
For  which  my  sinews  shall  be  stretched  upon  him." 

Coriol.  v.  6.  44. 
"  That's  /'/  that  always  makes  a  good  voyage  of  nothing." 

T.  N.  ii.  4.  80. 

"  An  if  it  please  me  which  thou  speak'st. "—  T.  A.  v.  I.  59. 
"  //  holds  current  that  I  told  you  of."— I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  i.  59. 
So  Isaiah  (A.  V.)  Ii.  9  :  "Art  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  Rahab?" 

Perhaps  we  must  explain  it  as  the  antecedent  of  "  what"  (and  not 
as  in  226)  in 

"  Deign  *'/,  Goddess,  from  my  hand 
To  receive  -whatever  this  land 
From  her  fertile  womb  doth  send." — B.  and  F.  Fair  Sh.  i.  i. 

228.  Its  was  not  used  originally  in  the  Authorized  Version  of  the 
Bible,  and  is  said  to  have  been  rarely  used  in  Shakespeare's  time. 
It   is,   however,   very  common   in   Florio's   Montaigne.      His  still 
represented  the  genitive  of  //  as  well  as  of  He.     Its  is  found,  how- 
ever, in  M.  for  M.  i.  2.  4,  where  it  is  emphatic  ;  in  W.  T.  i.  2  (three 
times,  151,  152,  266)  ;  Hen.  VIII.  i.  1. 18  ;  Lear,  iv.  2.  32,  and  else- 
where.   Occasionally  //,  an  early  provincial  form  of  the  old  genitive, 
is  found  for  its,  especially  when  a  child  is  mentioned,  or  when  any 
one  is  contemptuously  spoken  of  as  a  child.     Ben  Jonson  (Sil.  Worn. 
ii.  3)  uses  both  forms — 

"  Your  knighthood  shall  come  on  its  knees." 
And  then,  a  few  lines  lower  down — 

"  It  knighthood  shall  fight  all  //  friends." 
Comp.  W.  T.  iii.  2.  109  : 

"  The  innocent  milk  in  it  most  innocent  mouth." 

"  The  hedge-sparrow  fed  the  cuckoo  so  long, 
That  it's  had  /'/  head  bit  off  by  it  young." — Lear,  i.  4.  235, 

But  also  of  an  unknown  person  : 

"  The  corse  they  follow  did  with  desperate  hand 

Fordo  //own  life."— (Folio.)     Hamlet,  v.  I.  IMS. 
"  Woman  it  pretty  self."— (Folio.)     Cymb.  iii.  4.  160. 


,52  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

And  of  the  ghost : 

"  It  lifted  up  it  head."— (Folio.)     Hamlet,  i.  2.  216. 
Perhaps  the  dislike  of  its,  even  in  the  eighteenth  century,  aided 
the  adoption  of  the  French  idiom  "  lever  la  tete." 

"  Where  London's  column,  pointing  at  the  skies, 
Like  a  tall  bully  lifts  the  head  and  lies. " 

POPE,  Moral  Essays,  iii.  340. 

"  //-selfe  "  is  found  referring  to  "  who."     (See  264. ) 

"  The  world  who  of  //-selfe  is  peised  well."— K.  J.  ii.  i.  575. 

229.  Her  is  very  often  applied  by  Shakespeare  to  the  mind  and 
soul. 

"  Whose  soul  is  that  which  takes  her  heavy  leave  ?" 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  6.  42. 
"  Since  my  dear  soul  was  mistress  of  her  choice." 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  68. 
So  Rich.  III.  iii.  5.  28  ;  Hamlet,  ii.  2.  580. 

"  Our  mind  partakes 
Her  private  actions  to  your  secrecy." — P.  of  T.  i.  I.  163. 

So  Montaigne,  117. 

The  former  passage  from  Hamlet  shows  the  reason  of  this.  The 
soul,  when  personified,  is  regarded  as  feminine,  like  Psyche.  The 
body  of  a  woman  is  also  thus  personified  in 

"  And  made  thy  body  bare 
Of  her  two  branches,  those  sweet  ornaments." — T.  A.  ii.  4.  18. 

Milton  occasionally  uses  its ;  often  her  for  its;  seldom,  if  ever, 
his  for  its. 

"  His  form  had  not  yet  lost 

All  her  original  brightness." — MlLTON,  P.  L.  i.  592. 
In  this,  and  some  other  passages,  but  not  in  all,  Milton  may  have 
been  influenced  by  the  Latin  use  of  the  feminine  gender.     "  Form  " 
represents  "forma,"  a  feminine  Latin  noun. 
Personification  will  explain 

"That  Tiber  trembled  underneath  her  banks." 

J.  C.  i.  i.  50. 

230.  Ungrammatical  remnants  of  ancient  usage,     in 

Chaucer  and  earlier  writers,  preference  is  expressed,   both  by  onr 
modern  "I  had,  or  would,  rather  (i.e.  sooner),"  and  by  "(To)  me 


PRONOUNS.  153 

(it)  were  lever  (German  lieber),"  i.e.  "more  pleasant."     These  two 
idioms  are  confused  in  the  following  example  : 

"Me  rather  had  my  heart  might  feel  your  love." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  192. 

In  the  earliest  writers  "woe  !"  is  found  joined  with  the  dative 
inflection  of  the  pronoun,  "woe  is  (to)  us,"  "woe  is  (to)  me." 

"  Wa  worthe  (betide)  than  monne  (the  man,  dat.)." 

LAYAMON,  i.  142. 

As  early  as  Chaucer,  and  probably  earlier,  the  sense  of  the 
inflection  was  weakened,  and  "woe"  was  used  as  a  predicate  :  "I 
am  woe,"  "  we  are  woe,"  &c.  Hence  Shakespeare  uses  "  sorrow  " 
thus.  Similarly  our  "I  am  well  "is,  perhaps,  an  ungrammatical 
modification  of  "well  is  me,"  Ps.  cxxviii.  2  (Prayer-book).  In 
Early  English  both  constructions  are  found.  In  Anglo-Saxon, 
Miitzner  "has  only  met  with  the  dative  construction." 

"  I  am  sorrow  for  thee." — Cymb.  v.  5.  297. 

" / am  woe  for't,  sir." — Temp.  v.  I.  139. 

"  Woe  is  my  heart." — Cymb.  v.  5.  2. 

"  Woe,  woe  are  we,  sir." — A.  and  C.  iv.  14.  133. 
On  the  other  hand, 

"  Woe  is  me."— Hamlet,  iii.  I.  168. 

"  Woe  me."— M.  for  M.  iv.  I.  26. 

Similarly,  the  old  "(to)  me  (it)  were  better,"  being  misunderstood, 
was  sometimes  replaced  by  "  I  were  better." 

"  I  were  better  to  be  eaten  to  death."— 2  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  245. 

"  I  were  best  to  leave  him." — i  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  82. 

"  Poor  lady,  she  were  better  love  a  dream." — T.  N.  \.  2.  27. 

"  Tfuntrl  best" — Tempest,  i.  2.  366. 

And  when  the  old  idiom  is  retained,  it  is  generally  in  instances  like 
the  following : 

"Answer  truly,  you  were  best." — J.  C.  iii.  3.  15. 

"Madam,  you're  best  consider." — Cymb.  iii.  2.  79. 
where  you  may  represent   either   nominative   or  dative,   but   was 
almost  certainly  used  by  Shakespeare  as  nominative. 

231.  Thou  and  You.*  Thou  in  Shakespeare's  time  was,  very 
much  like  "du"  now  among  the  Germans,  the  pronoun  of  (i) 

*  The  Elizabethan  distinction  between  thou  and  you  is  remarkably  illustrated 
by  the  usage  in  E.  E.,  as  detailed  by  Mr.  Skeatin  William  ofPaltrne,  Preface, 
p.  xli. 


154  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

affection  towards  friends  (2)  good-humoured  superiority  to  servants, 
and  (3)  contempt  or  anger  to  strangers.  It  had,  however,  already 
fallen  somewhat  into  disuse,  and,  being  regarded  as  archaic,  was 
naturally  adopted  (4)  in  the  higher  poetic  style  and  in  the  language 
of  solemn  prayer. 

(i)  This  is  so  common  as  to  need  no  examples.  It  should  be 
remarked,  however,  that  this  use  is  modified  sometimes  by  euphony 
(the  ponderous  thou,  art,  and  terminations  in  est  being  avoided)  and 
sometimes  by  fluctuations  of  feeling.  Thus  in  the  T.  G.  of  V. 
Valentine  and  Proteus  in  the  first  twenty  lines  of  earnest  dialogue 
use  nothing  but  thou.  But  as  soon  as  they  begin  to  jest,  "thou 
art"  is  found  too  seriously  ponderous,  and  we  have  (i.  I.  25)  "you 
are  over  boots  in  love,"  while  the  lighter  thee  is  not  discarded 
in  (i.  i.  28)  "it  boots  thee  not."  So  in  the  word-fencing  of  lines 
36-40,  you  and  your  are  preferred,  but  an  affectionate  farewell  brings 
them  back  again  to  thou.  The  last  line  presents  an  apparent 
difficulty : 

"  Proteus.   All  happiness  bechance  to  thee  in  Milan  ! 
Valentine.  As  much  to  you  at  home,  and  so  farewell. " 

T.  G.  of  V.  i.  i.  61-2. 

But  while  thee  applies  to  the  single  traveller,  you  is  better  suited 
to  Proteus  and  his  friends  at  home.  It  may  be  added,  that  when  the 
friends  meet  after  their  long  parting,  there  is  a  certain  coldness  in 
the  frequent  you.  (T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  5.  120.) 

Fathers  almost  always  address  their  sons  with  thou;  sons  their 
fathers  with  you.  Thus  in  the  dialogue  between  Henry  IV.  and  the 
Prince  (i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  z),  line  118,  "What  say  you!"  is  perhaps 
the  only  exception  to  the  rule.  So  in  the  dialogue  between 
Talbot  and  his  son  (i  Hen.  VI.  iv.  5)  before  the  battle.  In  the  ex- 
citement of  the  battle  (i  Hen.  VI.  iv.  6.  6-9)  the  son  addresses  his 
father  as  tho»:  but  such  instances  are  very  rare.  (A.  Y.  L.  ii.  3.  69 
is  a  rhyming  passage,  and  impassioned  also.)  A  wife  may  vary 
between  thou  and  you  when  addressing  her  husband.  Lady  Percy 
addresses  Hotspur  almost  always  in  dialogue  with  you :  but  in  the 
higher  style  of  earnest  appeal  in  I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  3.  43-67,  and  in  the 
familiar  "I'll  break  thy  little  finger,  Harry,"  ib.  90,  she  uses  thou 
throughout. 

In  the  high  Roman  style,  Brutus  and  Portia  v&tyou. 

Hotspur  generally  uses  thou  to  his  wife,  but,  when  he  becomes 
serious,  rises  to  you,  dropping  again  to  that*. 


PRONOUNS.  155 

"     Hotspur.  Come,  wilt  thou  see  me  ride? 
And  when  I  am  o'  horse-back,  I  will  swear 

I  love  thee  infinitely But  hark  you,  Kate  ; 

I  must  not  have  you  henceforth  question  me  : 
This  evening  must  I  leave  you,  gentle  Kate. 
I  know  you  wise  ;  but  yet  no  further  wise 
Than  Harry  Percy's  wife :  constant  you  are, 
But  yet  a  woman :  and  for  secrecy 

No  lady  closer For  I  well  believe 

Thou  wilt  not  utter  what  thou  dost  not  know  ; 
And  so  far  will  I  trust  thee,  gentle  Kate." 

I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  3.  103-115. 

Mark  the  change  of  pronoun  as  Bassanio  assumes  the  part  of  a 
friendly  lecturer : 

"Gra.  I  have  a  suit  to  you. 
Bass.  You  have  obtain'd  it 

Gra.   You  must  not  deny  me  ;  I  must  go  with  you  to  Belmont. 
Bass.  Why,  then  you  must. — But  hear  thee,  Gratiano  ; 

Thou  art  too  wild,  too  rude  and  bold  of  voice,"  &c. 

M.  of  V.  ii.  2.  187-90. 


232.  ThOU  is  generally  used  by  a  master  to  a  servant,  but  not 
always.  Being  the  appropriate  address  to  a  servant,  it  is  used  in 
confidential  and  good-humoured  utterances,  but  a  master  finding 
fault  often  resorts  to  the  unfamiliar  you  (much  as  Caesar  cut  his 
soldiers  to  the  heart  by  giving  them  the  respectful  title  of  Quirites). 
Thus  Valentine  uses  you  to  Speed  in  T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  I.  1-17,  and 
thou,  Ib.  47-69.  Compare 

"  Val.  Go  to,  sir:  tell  me,  do  you  know  madam  Silvia  ?" — Ib.  14. 
with 

"  Val.  But  tell  me :  dost  thou  know  my  lady  Silvia  ?" — Ib.  44. 

Similarly  to  the  newly-engaged  servant  Julia,  who  says  "I'll  do 
what  I  can,"  Proteus  blandly  replies  : 

"I  hope  thou  wilt.     [To  Launce.]     How  now,  you  whore- 
son peasant, 
Where  have  you  been  these  two  days  loitering?" 

T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  48. 

When  the  appellative  "  sir"  is  used,  even  in  anger,  thou  generally 
gives  place  to  you. 

"  And  what  wilt  thou  do  ?     Beg,  when  that  is  spent  ? 
Well,  sir,  get  you  in."— A.   Y.  L.  i.  I.  79,  80. 


I56  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Ay,  ay,  thou  wouldst  begone  to  join  with  Richmond  : 

I  will  not  trust  you,  sir."— Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  492. 
Compare     "Speak,  what  trade  art  thou ?"—J.  C.  i.  I.  5. 
with  "  You,  sir,  what  trade  xte.  you  ?" — Ib.  9. 

This  explains  the  change  from  thou  to  you  in  Tempest,  \.  2.  443. 
Throughout  the  scene  Prospero,  addressing  Ferdinand  as  an  im- 
postor, "speaks  ungently"  with  thou.  In  Tempest,  v.  i.  75-79f 
Prospero,  who  has  addressed  the  worthy  Gonzalo  in  the  friendly 
thou,  and  the  repentant  Alonso  in  the  impassioned  thou,  turning  to 
his  unnatural  brother  says, 

"  Flesh  and  blood 
You  brother  mine" 
but,  on  pronouncing  his  forgiveness  immediately  afterwards,  he  says, 

"I  do  forgive  thee, 
Unnatural  though  thou  art." 

So     "  For  you,  most  wicked  sir,  whom  to  call  brother 
Would  even  infect  my  mouth,  I  do  forgive 
Thy  rankest  fault. "—Tempest,  v.  i.  230-2. 
"  Worthy  sir,  thou  bleed'st. " — Coriol.  i.  5.  15. 
is  easily  explained  by  the  admiring  epithet  "worthy."     Compare 
Ib.  24  :  "  Bold  gentleman,  prosperity  be  thy  page." 

The  difference  between  thou  and  you  is  well  illustrated  by  the 
farewell  addressed  by  Brutus  to  his  schoolfellow  Volumnius,  and  his 
servant  Strato  : 

"  Farewell  to  you  ;  and  you;  and  you,  Volumnius; 
Farewell  to  thee,  too,  Strato."— J.  C.  v.  5.  33. 

Compare  also  the  farewell  between  the  noble  Gloucester  and  Edgar 
"  dressed  like  a  peasant :" 

"  Edg.  Now  fare^>«  well,  good  sir." — Lear,  iv.  6.  32. 

"  Glouc.  Now,  fellow,  fare  thee  well." — Ib.  41. 
It  may  seem  an  exception  that  in  sc.  iv.  i,  Edgar  uses  thou  to 
Gloucester,  but  this  is  only  because  he  is  in  the  height  of  his  assumed 
madness,  and  cannot  be  supposed  to  distinguish  persons.  After- 
wards, in  sc.  vi. ,  he  invariably  uses  you — a  change  which,  together 
with  other  changes  in  his  language,  makes  Gloucester  say : 

"  Thou  speak'st 
In  better  phrase  and  manner  than  thou  didst. " — Lear,  iv.  6.  8. 

It  may  be  partly  this  increased  respect  for  Edgar,  and  partly 
euphony,  -which  makes  Gloucester  usejjw/  in  //.  10  and  24. 


PRONOUNS.  157 

Thus  Clarence  to  the  Second  Murderer  : 

"  Clar.  Where  art  thou,  keeper?    Give  me  a  cup  of  wine. 
Sec.  Murd.    You  shall  have  wine  enough,  my  lord,  anon. 
Clar.   In  God's  name,  what  art  thou  ? 
Sec.  Murd.  A  man,  as  you  are. 

Clar.   How  darkly  and  how  deadly  dost  thou  speak ! 
Your  eyes  do  menace  me  :  why  look  you  pale  ? 
Who  sent  you  hither  ?     Wherefore  do  you  come  ?  " 

Rich.  III.  \.  4.  167-176. 

The  last  two  lines  seem  discrepant :  but  they  are  not.     Clarence 
is  addressing  both  murderers,  and  both  reply  : 
"Both.  To,  to,  to — 
Clar.  To  murder  me  ? 

Both.  Ay,  ay." 

Afterwards,  when  the  murderers  reproach  Clarence  with  his  faults, 
they  address  him  as  thou. 

233.  TllOU  towards  strangers  who  were  not  inferiors  was  an 
insult.  "If  thou  thouest  him  some  thrice,  it  shall  not  be  amiss," 
( T.  N.  iii.  2.  48, )  is  the  advice  given  to  Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek 
when  on  the  point  of  writing  a  challenge. 

In  addressing  Angelo,  whose  seat  he  occupies,  the  Duke  in  the 
following  passage  begins  with  ironical  politeness,  but  passes  into 
open  contempt  : 
' '    Duke  (to  Escalus).  What  you  have  spoke  I  pardon ;  sit  you  down ; 

We'll  borrow  place  of  him.    (To  Angelo.}  Sir,  by  your  leave, 

Hast  thou  or  word  or  wit  or  impudence, 

That  now  can  do  thee  office  ?" — M.  for  M.  v.  I.  358. 

Thou  is  also  used  in  a  contemptuous  "aside." 

"  Hastings.  'Tis  like  enough  for  I  stay  dinner  there. 

Buckingham  (aside).   And  supper  too,  although  thou  know'st 

it  not. 
Come,  willow  go?" — Rich.  III.  iii.  2.  122. 

And,  where  there  is  no  contempt,  Cassius  passes  into  thou  when  he 
addresses  Brutus  absent,  whereas  in  his  presence  he  restricts  him- 
self to  you  (J.  C.  \.  2.  311).  The  former  is  the  rhetorical,  the 
latter  the  conversational  pronoun.  So 

"  Be  thou  my  witness, 
You  know  that  I  held  Epicurus  strong." — J.  C.  v.  I.  74-7. 

This  explains  the  apparent  liberty  in 

"  O  wise  young  judge,  how  I  do  honour  thee  !  " 

M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  224. 


158  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

234.  Thou  is  often  used  in  statements  and  requests,  while  you 
is  used  in  conditional  and  other  sentences  where  there  is  no  direct 
appeal  to  the  person  addressed.     Similarly  the  somewhat  archaic 
ye  is   distinguished   by  Shakespeare   from  you  by  being  used   in 
rhetorical  appeals.     (See  Ye,  236. ) 

Come  thou  on  my  side,  and  entreat  for  me 
As  you  would  beg,  were  you  in  my  distress." 

Rich.  III.  i.  4.  273. 
"  But  tell  me  now 

My  drown'd  queen's  name,  as  in  the  rest  you  said 
Thou  hast  been  god-like  perfect. "—P.  of  T.  v.  I.  208. 
"  I  go,  and  if  you  plead  as  well  to  them 
As  I  can  say  nay  to  thee  for  myself." — Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  52. 

' '  Give  me  thy  hand,  Messala ; 
Be  thou  my  witness  that  against  my  will,  &c. 
You  know  that  I  held  Epicurus  strong." — J.  C.  v.  I.  74-7. 

235.  Thou.    Apparent  exceptions. 

"  If  he  be  leaden,  icy-cold,  unwilling, 
Be  thou  so  too,  and  so  break  off  your  talk. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  177. 

Here  "your  talk"  means  the  talk  between  "thee  and  him." 

Tn  Hamlet,  i.  2.  41-49,  the  King,  as  he  rises  in  his  profession  of 

affection  to  Laertes,  passes  from  you  to  thou,  subsequently  returning 

to  you. 

In  the  following  instance  a  kiss  induces  the  speaker  to  pass  from 

your  to  thou : 

"      Goneril.  Decline  your  head.    (Kisses  Edmund. )    This  kiss, 

if  it  durst  speak, 
Would  raise  thy  spirits  up  into  the  air. " — Lear,  iv.  2.  23. 

The  most  difficult  passage  is  : 

"\ithou  beest  not  immortal,  look  about  you." — J.  C.  ii.  3.  8,  9. 

In  this  short  scene  Caesar  is  six  times  addressed  by  the  soothsayer 
in  the  solemn  and  prophetic  thou  and  thee,  but  once,  as  above,  you. 
I  can  only  suggest  that  "look  about  you"  may  mean  "look  about 
you  and  your  friends." 

In  almost  all  cases  where  thou  and  you  appear  at  first  sight 
indiscriminately  used,  further  considerations  show  some  change 
of  thought,  or  some  influence  of  euphony  sufficient  to  account  for 
the  change  of  pronoun. 


PRONOUNS.  159 

The  French  Herald  addresses  Henry  V.  as  thou,  not  for  dis- 
courtesy (Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  74),  but  in  the  "high  style"  appropriate 
between  heralds  and  monarchs.  Few  subjects  would  address  their 
lords  as  thou.  Only  a  Caliban  addressing  his  Stephano  would  in 
the  ordinary  language  say  : 

"Good  my  lord,  give  me  thy  favour  still."—  Temp.  iv.  I.  204. 
Caliban  almost  always  thou's  unless  he  is  cursing  ( Temp.  i.  2.  363), 
or  when  he  is  addressing  more  than  one  person. 

236.  Ye.  In  the  original  form  of  the  language^  is  nominative, 
you  accusative.  This  distinction,  however,  though  observed  in  our 
version  of  the  Bible,  was  disregarded  by  Elizabethan  authors,  and 
ye  seems  to  be  generally  used  in  questions,  entreaties,  and  rhetorical 
appeals.  Ben  Jonson  says  :  "  The  second  person  plural  is  for  reve- 
rence sake  to  some  singular  thing. "  He  quotes — 

"  O  good  father  dear, 

Why  makejv  this  heavy  cheer?" — GOWF.R. 
Compare  : 

"  I  do  beseech  ye,  if  you  bear  me  hard." — J.  C.  iii.  I.  157. 
"  You  taught  me  how  to  know  the  face  of  right, 
And  come  ye  now  to  tell  me  John  hath  made 
His  peace  with  Rome?"— K.  J.  v.  2.  91. 
"The  more  shame  for^;  holy  men  I  thought^." 

Hen.  VIJ1.  iii.  I.  102. 
"  Therein,  ye  gods,  you  make  the  weak  most  strong." 

J.  C.  i.  3.  91. 
"I' the  name  of  truth, 
Are  ye  fantastical  ?  .  .  .  My  noble  partner 
You  greet  with  present  grace. " — Macbeth,  i.  3.  53-55. 

Ye  and  your  seem  used  indiscriminately  in  Temp.  v.  I.  33-8,  "  Ye 
elves  .  .  .  and  ye  that  .  .  .  you  demi-puppets  .  .  .  and  you  whose 
pastime  is,  &c." 

The  confusion  between  you  and  ye  is  illustrated  by  the  irregularity 
of  the  following : 

"What  mean^fc.  .  .  do  ye  not  know?.  .  .  If,  therefore,  at  the 
first  sight  ye  doe  give  them  to  understand  that  you  are  come  hither 
.  .  .  do  you  not  think?  Therefore,  tfyou  looke  .  .  ." — N.  P.  170. 

Sometimes  ye  seems  put  for  you  when  an  unaccented  syllable  is 
wanted : 

"I  never  loved  you  much  ;  but  I  ha'  prais'd^<?." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  6.  78. 


160  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

and  perhaps  in 

"  Ye  shall,  my  lord,"— Rich.  III.  iv.  2.  86. 

the  "shall"  being  emphatic,  and  ye  unemphatic,  but  the  Folio 
varies  here,  as  frequently  in  this  play. 

237.  Mine,  my.    Thine,  thy.   The  two  forms,  which  are  inter- 
changeable in  E.  E.  both  before  vowels  and  consonants,  are  both 
used  by  Shakespeare  with  little  distinction  before  vowels. 

Though  there  are  probably  many  exceptions,  yet  the  rule  appears 
to  be  that  mine  and  thine  are  used  where  the  possessive  adjective  is 
to  be  unemphatic,  my  and  thy  in  other  cases. 

Mine  is  thus  used  before  words  to  which  it  is  so  frequently  pre- 
fixed as  to  become  almost  a  part  of  them,  as  "  mine  host  "  (M.  W. 
of  W.  i.  3.  1),  but  my  in  the  less  common 

"  Unto  my  hostess  of  the  tavern."— I  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  53. 
So  we  have  almost  always  "  mine  honour,"  the  emphatic 

' '  By  my  honour 
He  shall  depart  untouched,"— J.  C.  iii.  i.  141. 

being  an  exception.  Mine  is  almost  always  found  before  "eye," 
"  ear,"  &c.  where  no  emphasis  is  intended.  But  where  there  is 
antithesis  we  have  my,  thy: 

"My  ear  should  catch  your  voice,  my  eye  your  eye." 

M.  N.  D.  i.  i.  188. 
and  also  in  the  emphatic 

"To  follow  me  and  praise  my  eyes  and  face." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  223. 

Euphony  would  dictate  this  distinction.  The  pause  which  we  are 
obliged  to  make  between  my,  thy,  and  a  following  vowel,  serves  for 
a  kind  of  emphasis.  On  the  other  hand,  mine,  pronounced  "min," 
glides  easily  and  unemphatically  on  to  the  following  vowel. 

238.  Mine,  hers,  theirs,  are   used   as  pronominal  adjectives 
before  their  nouns.    That  mine  should  be  thus  used  is  not  remarkable, 
as  in  E.  E.  it  was  interchangeable  with  my,  and  is  often  used  by 
Shakespeare  where  we  should  use  my. 

"  Mine  and  my  father's  death  come  not  upon  thee." 

Hamlet,  v.  2.  341. 

"  The  body  is  dead  upon  mine  and  my  master's  false  accusation." 
— M.  Ado,  v.  i.  249.  So  P.  cf  T.  i.  2.  92;  Cymb.  v.  5.  230. 


PRONOUNS.  161 

In  the  following,  mine  is  only  separated  by  an  adjective  from  its 
noun  :     "And  his  and  mine  lov'd  darling." — Tempest,  iii.  3.  93. 
More  remarkable  are 

"  What  to  come  is  yours  and  my  discharge." — Temp,  il  I.  253. 
"  By  hers  and  mine  adultery." — Cymb.  v.  5.  186. 
1  Even  in  theirs  and  in  the  commons'  ears." — Coriol.  v.  6.  4. 

It  is  felt  that  the  ear  cannot  wait  till  the  end  of  the  sentence 
while  so  slight  a  word  as  her  or  their  remains  with  nothing  to  depend 
on.  The  same  explanation  applies  to  mine,  which,  though  unem- 
phatic  immediately  before  its  noun,  is  emphatic  when  separated 
from  its  noun. 

239.  This  Of  yours  is  now,  as  in  E.  E.,  generally  applied  to 
one  out  of  a  class,  whether  the  class  exist  or  be  imaginary.     We 
could  say  "this  coat  of  yours,"  but  not  (except  colloquially)  "this 
head  of  yours."     It  is,  however,  commonly  used  by  Shakespeare 
where  even  the  conception  of  a  class  is  impossible. 

"  Nor  scar  that  whiter  skin  of  hers  than  snow." — Othello,  v.  2.  4. 
"  Will  not  a  calf-skin  stop  that  mouth  of  thine?"— K.  J.  iii.  I.  299. 

"This  of  hers,  thine,"  &c.  seem  used  as  an  adjective,  like  the 
Latin  "iste."  "This  mouth  of  you"  was  felt  to  be  harsh,  the 
"you"  being  too  weak  to  stand  in  such  a  position.  "  This  your 
mouth"  requiring  a  forced  and  unnatural  pause  after  "this,"  was 
somewhat  more  objectionable  to  Shakespeare,*  than  to  the  Latin 
style  of  Milton  and  Addison.  Hence  "this  of  you"  was  used  but 
modified.  It  is  rare  that  we  find  such  a  transposition  as 

'  O  then  advance  of  yours  that  phraseless  hand." — L.  C.  225. 

240.  Pronouns  transposed.      A  feeling   of  the   unemphatic 
nature   of  the   nominatives  we  and  they  prevents  us  from  saying 
"all  we." 

"  Into  the  madness  wherein  now  he  raves 
And  all  we  mourn  for. " — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  151. 

So  "all  we  "  in  the  A.  V.  of  the  Bible,  and  "all  they,"  Mark  xii.  44. 
"Find  out"  is  treated  as  a  single  word  in 

"  Cass.  Cinna,  where  haste  you  so? 
Cinna.  'Yo find-out  you."— J.  C.  i.  3.  134. 

*  See,  however —  "  How  many  ages  hence 

Shall  this  our  lofty  scene  be  acted  over  1 " — J.  C.  ii.  i.  1 12. 

M 


162  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR, 

So        "To  belch-up  you."—  Tempest,  iii.  3.  56. 

"  And /*K*-0»/ thee."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  216. 

"Both  they  (i.e.  both  of  them) 

Match  not  the  high  perfection  of  my  loss."— Ib.  iv.  4.  65. 
No  modern  poet  would  be  allowed  to  write,  for  the  sake  of  rhyme, 

"  All  days  are  nights  to  see  till  I  see  thee, 
And  nights  bright  days  when  dreams  do  show  thee  me. 

Sonn.  43. 

We  could  only  say  "give  him  me,"  when  we  meant  "give  him, 
not  to  so-and-so,  but  to  me"  emphatically,  which  is  not  the  meaning 
here. 

241.  Omission  of  Thou.  (See  also  399,  402.)  After  a  verb 
ending  with  the  second  person  singular  inflection,  the  thou  is  some- 
times omitted  in  questions,  as : 

"  Didst  not  mark  that?"— Othello,  ii.  I.  260. 
"  How  dost  that  pleasant  plague  infest  ?  "—DANIEL. 
"  Wilt  dine  with  me,  Apemantus?"—  T.  of  A.  \.  I.  206. 
Thou  is  often  omitted  after  "  wouldst,"  or  perhaps  merged,  in  the 
form  "woo't,"  as  "wilt  thou"  becomes  "wilta," 

"  Noblest  of  men,  wW/die?"— A.  and  C.  iv.  15.  59. 
"  Woo't  weep?  Woo't  fight?.  . .  I'll  do  it."— Hamlet,  v.  I.  299. 
Sometimes  thou  is  inserted  : 

"  Woo't  thou  fight  well?"— A.  and  C.  iv.  2.  7. 

242.  Insertion  of  Pronoun.  When  a  proper  name  is  sepa- 
rated by  an  intervening  clause  from  its  verb,  then  for  clearness  (see 
248)  the  redundant  pronoun  is  often  inserted. 

"  Sueno,  albeit  he  was  of  nature  verie  cruell,  yet  qualified  he  his 

displeasure." — HOLINSHED,  Duncane. 
"  Demeratus — when  on  the  bench  he  was  long  silent  .  .  .  one 

asking  him  .   .  .  &?  answered." — B.  J.  Disc.  744. 
"  For  the  nobility,  though  they  continued  loyal  unto  him,  yet 
did  they  not  co-operate  with  him." — B.  E. 

243.  Insertion  Of  Pronoun.  Even  where  there  is  no  inter- 
vening conjunctional  clause,  the  pronoun  is  frequently  inserted  after  a 
proper  name  as  the  subject.  More  rarely,  the  subject  is  a  common 
noun.  Still  more  rarely,  the  pronoun  is  inserted  after  the  object. 


PRONOUNS.  163 

The  subject  or  object  stands  first,  like  the  title  of  a  book,  to  call 
the  attention  of  the  reader  to  what  may  be  said  about  it.  In  some 
passages  the  transition  may  be  perceived  from  the  exclamatory  use 

"  O  thy  vile  lady  ! 
She  has  robbed  me  of  my  sword," — A.  and  C.  iv.  14.  22. 

to  the  semi-exclamation  : 

"  For  God  he  knows."— Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  236  ;  i.  10  ;  I.  26. 

"  Where  Heaven  he  knows  how  we  shall  answer  him." 

K.  J.  v.  7.  59. 
(So  T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  112,  and 

"God,  I  pray  him."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  212. 
The  object  (as  in  the  last  example)  precedes  in 

"  My  sons,  God  knows  what  has  bechanced  them" 

3  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  6. 

"  Senseless  trees  they  cannot  hear  thee, 
Ruthless  beasts  they  will  not  cheer  thee."—/*.  P.  393.) 

and  hence  to  passages  of  simple  statement : 

"  The  skipping  king  he  ambled  up  and  down." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  60. 
"  Of  six  preceding  ancestors  that  gem 
Conferr'd  by  testament  to  the  sequent  issue 
Hath  it  been  owed  and  worn." — A.   W.  v.  3.  198. 
"But  this  same  Cassio,  though  he  speak  of  comfort 
Touching  the  Turkish  loss,  yet  he  looks  sadly. " 

Othello,  ii.  I.  31. 

But  many  such  passages  of  simple  statement  may  be  regarded  as 
abridgments  of  the  construction  with  "for,"  "of,"  or  some  other 
preposition  : 

"  For  your  intent  ...;'/  is  most  retrograde  to  our  desires." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  112. 

"  For  my  voice,  I  have  lost  it  with  halloing  and  singing  of 
anthems."— 2  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  213. 

So  "  For  (as  regards)  your  brother,  he  shall  go  with  me,"  might 
become 

"  Your  brother  he  shall  go  along  with  me." 

A.  IV.  iii.  6.  117  ;  Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  80 ;  I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  442. 
So   "  Of  Salisbury,  who  can  report  of  him  ?" — 2  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  1. 


M      2 


,64  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 


RELATIVE    PRONOUNS. 

244.  Omission  of  the  Relative.  The  relative  is  frequently 
omitted,  especially  where  the  antecedent  clause  is  emphatic  and 
evidently  incomplete.  This  omission  of  the  relative  may  in  part 
have  been  suggested  by  the  identity  of  the  demonstrative  that  and 
the  relative  that : — 

"  We  speak  that  (dem.)  that  (rel.)  we  do  know,' 
may  naturally  be  contracted  into — 

"  We  speak  that  we  do  know." 

Thus— 

"And  that  (that}  most  deeply  to  consider  is 
The  beauty  of  his  daughter." — Temp.  iii.  2.  106. 

"Thy  honourable  metal  may  be  wrought 
From  that  (to  which)  it  is  disposed.  "-J.  C.  i.  2.  314. 
"Now  follows  that  (that)  you  know,  young  Fortinbras,"  &c. 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  17. 
"And  that  (that)  is  worse — the  Lords  of  Ross  are  fled." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  52. 

i.e.  "which  is  worse."  So  often  in  the  A.  V.  of  the  Bible,  "  that 
is,  being  interpreted,"  means  "which  is"  (as  the  Greek  shows), 
though  a  modern  reader  would  suppose  that  to  be  the  demonstrative. 
In  many  cases  the  antecedent  immediately  precedes  the  verb  to 
which  the  relative  would  be  the  subject. 

"  I  have  a  brother  (who)  is  condemned  to  die." 

M.for  M.  ii.  2.  33;  C.  of  E.  v.  i.  283. 
"I  have  a  mind  (which)  presages." — M.  of  V.  i.  I.  175. 
"  The  hate  of  those  (who)  love  not  the  king. " 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  128. 
"  In  war  was  never  lion  (that)  raged  more  fierce." 

Ib.  ii.  I.  173. 
"  And  sue  a  friend  (who)  'came  debtor  for  my  sake." 

Sonn.  139. 

"  What  wreck  discern  you  in  me  (that} 
Deserves  your  pity  T'—Cymb.  i.  6.  84  ;  W.  T.  iv.4.  378, 512. 

"  You  are  one  of  those  (who) 
Would  have  him  wed  again."—  W.  T.  v.  I.  23. 
'  I'll  show  you  those  (who)  in  troubles  reign, 
Losing  a  mite,  a  mountain  gain."—/',  of  T.  ii.  Cower,  8. 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  165 

"  Of  all  (who  have)  'say'd  (tried)  yet,  may'st  thou   prove  pros- 
perous."— P.  ofT.  i.  i.  59. 

"  And  they  are  envious  (that)  term  thee  parasite." — B.  J.  Fox,  i.  I. 

"  For  once  (when)  we  stood  up  about  the  corn,  he  himself  stuck 
not  to  call  us  the  many-headed  multitude." 

Coriol.  ii.  3.  16. 

i.e.  "  On  one  occasion  (on  which}  we  stood  up,"  &c.     Compare — 

"  Was  it  not  yesterday  (on  which)  we  spoke  together?" 

Macbeth,  iii.  I.  74. 
"Off  with  his  head, 
And  rear  it  in  the  place  (in  which)  your  father's  stands." 

3  Hen.  VI.  V.  6.  86. 
"  Declare  the  cause 

(for  which)  My  father,  Earl  of  Cambridge,  lost  his  head. " 

I  Hen.  VI.  ii,  5.  55. 

"  O  that  forc'd  thunder  (that)  from  his  breath  did  fly  ! — 
O  that  sad  breath  (that)  his  spongy  lungs  bestow'd  !  " 

Z.  C.  46. 
"  And  being  frank  she  lends  to  these  (who)  are  free." 

Sonn.  4. 
So  explain  : 

"To  me  (whom)  you  cannot  reach  you  play  the  spaniel." 

Hen.  VIII.  v.  2.  126. 
"That's  to  you  sworn  (that)  to  none  was  ever  said." 

Z.  C.  25.     SoM.forM.  iii.  2.  165. 

Most  of  these  examples  (except  those  in  which  when  and  why  are 
omitted)  omit  the  nominative.  Modem  usage  confines  the  omission 
mostly  to  the  objective.  "  A  man  (whom)  I  saw  yesterday  told 
me,"  &c.  We  must  either  explain  thus  : 

"Myself  and  Toby 

Set  this  device  against  Malvolio  here  (which  device), 
Upon  some  stubborn  and  discourteous  parts, 
We  had  conceiv'd  against  him," — T.  N.  v.  I.  370. 
or  suppose  (more  probably),  that  there  is  some  confusion  between 
"  conceiving  enmity  "  and  "  disliking  parts." 
In  "  To  her  own  worth 

She  shall  be  prized  :  but  that  you  say  '  Be  't  so,' 
I'll  speak  it  in  my  spirit  and  honour  '  No.'  " 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  4.  136. 
that  probably  means  "as  to  that  which." 
Other  instances  are  : 

"My  sister.  .  .  a  lady,  sir  (who),  though  it  was  said  she  much 
resembled  me,  was  yet  of  many  accounted  beautiful." — T.  N.  ii.  I.  27. 


166  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"What  should  I  do  (that)  I  do  not?"— A.  and  C.  i.  3.  8. 
"  Of  every  virtue  (that)  gives  renown  to  men." — P.  of  T.  i.  I.  13. 
Either  a  relative  or  a  nominative  (see  399)  is  omitted  in 
"  These  are  my  mates  that  make  their  wills  their  law 
( Who)  have  some  unhappy  passenger  in  chace. " 

T.  G.  of  V.  v.  4.  15. 

In     "And  curse  that  justice  did  it," — Coriol.  i.  I.  179. 
either  the  relative  is  omitted  after  "justice,"  or  "that"  is  used  for 
"because"  (284). 

So,  after  disobeying  King  Cymbeline  by  allowing  Posthumus  to 
speak  to  the  King's  daughter,  the  Queen,  while  purposing  to  betray 
Posthumus,  says  aside  : 

"Yet  I'll  move  him  (the  king) 

To  walk  this  way  :  I  never  do  him  (the  king)  wrong 

But  he  (who,  like  Posthumus)  does  buy  my  injuries  to  be  friends, 

Pays  dear  for  my  offences." — Cymb.  i.  I.  105. 
The  relative  adverb  -where  is  omitted  in 

"  From  that  place  (where}  the  morn  is  broke 
To  that  place  (where)  day  doth  unyoke."— B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  i.  I. 

That,  meaning  "when,"  is  omitted  after  "now."     (See  284.) 

245.  The  Relative  is  omitted  (as  well  as  the  verb  "is,"  "are," 
&c. )  between  a  pronominal  antecedent  and  a  prepositional  phrase, 
especially  when  locality  is  predicated. 

"  And  they  in  France  of  the  best  rank  and  station." 

Hamlet,  i.  3.  129. 

"He  made  them  of  Greece  (i.e.  the  Grecians)  to  begin  warre." 
-N.  P.  175. 

So  "  What  is  he  at  the  gate  ?"—  T.  N.  i.  5.  125. 

So   in   Early   English    and    Anglo-Saxon.       We   make   the   same 
omission,  but  only  after  nouns  :  "The  babes  in  the  wood." 

246.  The  Relative  is  omitted  in  the  following  example,  and  the 
antecedent  is  attracted  into  the  case  which  the  relative,  if  present, 
would  have  : 

"  Him  (he  whom)  I  accuse, 

By  this,  the  city  ports  hath  enterM."— Coriol.  v.  6.  6. 
Apparently  there  is  an  ellipsis  of  "that  (relative)  is"  before  participles 
in  the  following  : 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS,  167 

"  Not  that  devour'd,  but  that  which  doth  devour, 

Is  worthy  blame," — R.  of  L.  451. 

where  "that  devour'd"  seems  used  for  "  that  that  is  devour'd." 
"  Why  have  you  not  proclaim'd  Northumberland, 
And  all  the  rest  (that  are)  revolted,  faction-traitors?" 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  57. 
And  in 

"I  hate  the  murderer,  love  him  murdered," 

Rich.  II.  v.  5.  40. 

the  meaning  seems  to  be,  not  "  I  love  the  fact  that  he  is  murdered," 
but  "I  love  him  (who  is)  murdered."  Compare  the  harsh  con- 
struction in 

"  But  you  must  know  your  father  lost  a  father, 

That  father  (who  was)  lost,  lost  his." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  90. 
"A  little  riper  and  more  lusty  red 
Than  that  (which  is)  mixed  in  his  cheek." 

A.   Y.  L.  iii.  5.  222. 

The  relative  is  attracted  to  a  subsequent  implied  object  in  the 
following  : 

"Thou  shall  not  lack 

The  leaf  of  eglantine,  whom  not  to  slander, 
Outsweetened  not  thy  breath." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  223. 

i.e.  "the  leaf  which,  not  to  slander  it,  would  not  outsweeten,"  &c. 

247.  The  Relative  (perhaps  because  it  does  not  signify  by 
inflection  any  agreement  in  number  or  person  with  its  antecedent) 
frequently  (i)  takes  a  singular  verb,  though  the  antecedent  be 
flural,  and  (2)  the  verb  is  often  in  the  third  person,  though  the 
antecedent  be  in  the  second  or  first. 

(i)  "All  things  that  belongs"  (so  Folio;  Globe,  belong). — T.  of  Sh. 
ii.  i.  357. 

"  Whose  wraths  to  guard  you  from, 
WJiich  here  in  this  most  desolate  isle  elseyo//j 
Upon  your  head. " — Temp.  iii.  2.  80. 
"Contagious  fogs  which  falling  on  our  land 

Hath  every  pelting  river  made  so  proud." — M".  N.  D.  ii.  I.  91. 
This,  however,  might  be  explained  by  337. 

"  'Tis  not  the  many  oaths  that  makes  the  truth." 

A.  W.  iv.  2.  21 ;  K.  J.  ii.  i.  216. 
"With  sighs  of  love  that  costs  the  fresh  blood  dear." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  97. 


i68  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  My  observations 

Which  with  experimental  seal  doth  warrant 
The  tenour  of  my  book." — M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  168. 
4 "Tis  your  graces  that  charms." — Cymb.  i.  6.  117. 
"  So,  so,  so  :  they  laugh  that  wins"  (Globe,  win). 

Othello,  iv.  i.  125. 

"So  are  those  crisped  snaky  golden  locks 
Which  makes."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  92. 

"  Those  springs 

In  chalic'd  flowers  that  lies."— Cymb.  ii.  3.  24. 
"  Each  substance  of  a  grief  hath  twenty  shadows 

Which  shows  like  grief  itself."—  Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  15. 
"It  is  not  words,  that  shakes  me  thus." — Othello,  iv.  I.  43. 

"  But  most  miserable 
Is  the  desires  that's  glorious."     (Globe,  "  desire.") 

Cymb.  i.  6.  6. 
1 '  'Tis  such  fools  as  you 
That  makes  the  world  full  of  ill-favour  d  children." 

A.  Y.  L.  iii.  5.  53. 
"  (The  swords)  That  makes  such  waste  in  brief  mortality." 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  28. 
"There  are  some  shrewd  contents  in  yon  same  paper 

That  steals  the  colour  from  your  cheeks." — M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  246. 
"  Is  kindling  coals  that  fires  all  my  heart." — 3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  I.  83. 
"  With  such  things  else  of  quality  and  respect 

As  doth  import  you."—  Othello,  i.  3.  283. 
"  Such  commendations  as  becomes  a  maid." — I  Hen.  VI.  v.  3-177. 
"  Such  thanks  as  fits  a  king's  remembrance. " — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  26. 
"  Like  monarch's  hands  that  lets  not  bounty  fall." 

Z.  C.  41  (Globe,  let). 
"If  it  be  you  (you  gods)  that  stirs  these  daughters'  hearts." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  275  (Globe,  stir). 
"  To  be  forbod  the  sweets  that  seems  so  good." 

L.  C.  164  (Globe,  seem). 

The  distance  of  the  relative  from  the  antecedent  sometimes  makes 
a  'liflerence,  as  in 

"  I  that  please  some,  try  all,  both  joy  and  terror 
Of  good  and  bad,  that  makes  and  unfolds  error. " 

W.  T.  iv.  i.  2. 

This  construction  is  found  as  late  as  1671  : 
"If  it  be  true  that  monstrous  births  presage 
The  following  mischiefs  that  afflicts  the  age." 

The  Rehearsal,  Epilogue. 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  169 

(2)   "Antiochus,  I  thank  thee  who  hath  taught."—/1,  of  T.  \.  I.  41. 
"  Casca,  you  are  the  first  that  rears  your  hand." — J.  C.  iii.  I.  80 
"Rears  his"  or  "  rear  your"  would  be  right. 

"To  make  me  proud  that  jests." — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  66. 
"For  it  \syou  that  puts  us  to  our  shifts." — T.  A.  iv.  2.  176. 
So  Temp.  v.  I.  79. 

"  0  Lord,  that  lends  me  life  !"— 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  i.  9. 
"  They  do  but  greatly  chide  thee  who  confounds"— Sonn.  8. 
The  last  two  examples  may  also  be  explained  (see  340)  by  the 
northern  inflection  of  s  for  st :  and  the  examples  in  (i)  might  come 
under  the  cases  of  plural  nominative  with  apparently  singular  in- 
flection considered  in  333.     But  taking  all  the  examples  of  (i)  and 
(2)  we  are,  I  think,  justified  in  saying  that  the  relative  was  often 
regarded  like  a  noun  by  nature  third  person  singular,  and,  therefore, 
uninfluenced  by  the  antecedent 

On  the  other  hand,  the  verb  is  irregularly  attracted  into  the 
second  person  in 

"  That  would  I  learn  of  you 
As  one  that  are  best  acquainted  with  her  person." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  268. 

248.  Relative  with  Supplementary  Pronoun.    With  the 

Germans  it  is  still  customary,  when  the  antecedent  is  a  pronoun  of 
the  first  or  second  person,  to  repeat  the  pronoun  for  the  sake  of 
defining  the  person,  because  the  relative  is  regarded  as  being  in  the 
third  person.  Thus  "Thou  who  thou  hearest,"  &c.  The  same 
repetition  was  common  in  Anglo-Saxon  (and  in  Hebrew)  for  all 
persons.  "  That  (rel.)  through  him  "  =  "  through  whom, "  "  a  tribe 
that  they  can  produce"  =  "a  tribe  who  can  produce,"  &c. 

Hence  in  Chaucer,  Prol.  43-45  : 

"  A  knight  ther  was,  and  that  a  worthy  man, 
That,  from  the  tyme  that  he  first  began 
To  ryden  out,  he  lovede  chyvalrye  ;  " 

and  in  the  same  author  "that  his" ="  whose,"  "that  him  "="whom," 
&c. 

In  the  same  way  in  Elizabethan  authors,  when  the  interrogative 
who  (251)  had  partially  supplanted  that  as  a  relative,  we  find  who 
his  for  whose,  whom  him  for  whom,  which  it  for  which,  &c. 

The  following  is  probably  not  a  case  of  the  supplementary 
pronoun  : 


170  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Bardolph  and  Nym  had  ten  times  more  valour  than  this  roaring 
devil  i'  the  old  play,  that  every  one  may  pare  his  nails  with  a  wooden 
dagger." — Henry  V.  iv.  4.  76. 

That  ...  his  is  not  elsewhere  used  in  Shakespeare,  that  I  know 
of.  The  above  probably  means  "  than  this  (fellow,  who  is)  a  mere 
devil-in-the-play,  so  that  every  one  may  beat  him." 

249.  The  Supplementary  Pronoun  is  generally  confined  to 

cases  (as  above,  242)  where  the  relative  is  separated  from  its  verb  by 
an  intervening  clause,  and  where  on  this  account  clearness  requires 
the  supplementary  pronoun. 

' '  Who,  when  he  lived,  his  breath  and  beauty  set 

Gloss  on  the  rose,  smell  on  the  violet." — V.  and  A. 
"  Which,  though  it  alter  not  love's  sole  effect, 
Yet  doth  //  steal  sweet  hours  from  love's  delight. " 

Sonn.  36. 

"  And  who,  though  all  were  wanting  to  reward, 
Yet  to  himself  he  would  not  wanting  be." — B.  J.  Cy.  's  Rev. 

"  Whom, 

Though  bearing  misery,  I  desire  my  life 
Once  more  to  look  on  him." — W.  T.  v.  I.  138. 
"  (The  queen)  whom  Heavens  in  justice  both  on  her  and  hers 

Have  laid  most  heavy  hand." — Cymb.  v.  5.  464. 
Here  the  construction  is  further  changed  by  the  addition  of  "both 
.  .  .  and  hers." 

"You  are  three  men  of  sin  whom  Destiny 
(That  hath  to  instrument  this  lower  world, 
And  what  is  in't)  the  never-surfeited  sea 
Hath  caused  to  belch  np you." — Temp.  iii.  2.  53. 
In  the  following  passage  the  which  may  almost  with  better  right 
be  regarded  as  supplementary  than  the  noun  which  follows  : 

"  Our  natural  goodness 
Imparts  this  ;  which  if  you  or  stupified 
Or  seeming  so  in  skill,  cannot  or  will  not 
Relish  a  truth  like  us,  inform  yourselves 
;We  need  no  more  of  your  advice."—  W.  T.  ii.  i.  165. 
Here  which  means  "as  regards  which,"  and  in  this  and  in  other 
places  it  approximates  to  that  vulgar  idiom  which  is  well  known  to 
readers  of  "  Martin  Chuzzlewit."     (See  272.) 

The  following  seems  at  first  as  though  it  could  be  explained  thus ; 
but  "who"  is  put  for  "whom  "  (see  274),  and  "exact  the  penalty"  is 
regarded  as  a  transitive  verb  : 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  171 

"  Who,  if  he  break,  thou  may'st  with  better  face 
Exact  the  penalty."—^/,  of  V.  i.  3.  137. 

Or  this  may  be  an  imitation  of  the  Latin  idiom  which  puts  the 
relative  before  the  conjunction,  thus  : 

"  Who,  when  they  were  in  health,  I  tell  thee,  herald, 
I  thought  upon  one  pair  of  English  legs 
Did  walk  three  Frenchmen." — Hen.   V.  iii.  6.  157. 

250.  Which  that. 

"  Spite  of  his  spite  which  that  in  vain 
Doth  seek  to  force  my  fantasy." — INGELEND  (A.D,  1560). 

This  use  of  -which  that  consecutively  is  common  in  Chaucer,  but 
not  in  Elizabethan  authors.  When  it  is  remembered  that  -which 
was  originally  an  interrogative,  it  is  easier  to  understand  how  that 
may  have  been  added  to  give  a  relative  force  to  which. 

251.  Who  and  what.     In  Early  English  -who  was  the  masc.  or 
fern,   and  what  the  neut.  interrogative  (or  used  as   the   indefinite 
relative   who-so,    what-so\  that  being  both  the  demonstrative  and 
relative,  except  in  the  oblique  cases. 

The  transition  of  the  interrogative  to  the  relative  can  easily  be 
explained.  Thus,  the  sentence 

"  O  now  who  will  behold 
The  royal  captain  of  this  ruin'd  band  ? 
Let  him  cry  '  Praise  and  glory  on  his  head,'" 

Hen.  V.  iv.  Prologue. 

may  easily  become  "  now  let  him  who  will  behold,"  &c. 

We  can  now  only  use  who-ever  in  this  sense,  but  the  Germans 
still  use  their  interrogative  (wer)  thus.  In  such  cases  the  who  mostly 
retains  a  trace  of  its  interrogative  meaning  by  preceding  the  ante- 
cedent clause  : 

"  Who  steals  my  purse  (he)  steals  trash," — Othello,  iii.  3.  157. 
and  hence  referring  to  a  definite  past  : 

"  Who  was  the  thane  (he)  lives  yet. "— Macbeth,  i.  3.  109. 
In  this  and  other  examples  (as  in  Greek)  the  antecedent  pronoun 
is  often  omitted  owing  to  the  emphatic  position  of  the  relative. 

"  Whom  we  raise  we  will  make  fast." — 2  Hen.   VI.  i.  4.  25. 
"  Is  proclamation  made  that  who  finds  Edward 
Shall  have  a  high  reward  ?"— 3  Hen.   VI.  v.  3.  9. 


172  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Fixing  our  eyes  on  whom  our  care  was  fixed." 

C.  ofE.  i.  I.  85. 

"We  are  going  to  -whom  it  must  be  done." — y.  C.  ii.  I.  331. 
252.  What,  being  simply  the  neuter  of  the  interrogative  who, 
ought  consistently  to  be  similarly  used.     As,  therefore,  who  is  used 
relatively,  we  may  expect  what  to  be  used  so  likewise.     And  so  it 
is ;  but,  inasmuch  as  the  adjective  which  very  early  took  the  force 
of  the   relative   pronoun,  what  was  supplanted  by  which,  and  is 
rarely  used  relatively.    Even  when  it  is  thus  used,  it  generally  stands 
before  its  antecedent  (like  the  transitional  use  of  who  above),  thereby 
indicating  its  interrogative  force,  though  the  position  of  the  verb  is 
altered  to  suit  a  statement  instead  of  a  question. 
"  What  our  contempt  doth  often  hurl  from  us 
We  wish  it  ours  again."— A. and  C.  i.  2.  127.  So  Rich.  II.  i.  I.  87. 
"  What  you  have  spoke  it  may  be  so  perchance." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  11. 
"  Look,  what  I  speak,  my  life  shall  prove  it  true." 

Rich.  IL  i.  i.  87. 
"It  is  true  that  what  is  settled  by  custom,  though  it  be  not 

good,  yet  at  least  it  is  fit." — B.  E.  99 
An  unemphatic  antecedent  precedes  what  in 
"  And  I  do  fearfully  believe  'tis  done 

What  we  so  feared  he  had  a  charge  to  do." — K.  J.  iv.  I.  75. 
I  cannot  remember  any  instance  where  what  has  for  its  antecedent 
a  noun,  as  in  the  modern  vulgarism,  "  The  man  what  said."     In 
"  And  let  us  once  again  assail  your  ears, 
That  are  so  fortified  against  our  story, 
What  we  have  two  nights  seen"—ffamtet,  I  i.  33. 
What  depends  on  a  verb  of  speech,  implied  either  in  "assail  your 
ears"  or  in  "story,"  i.e.  "let  us  tell  you  what  we  have  seen,"  or 
"  our  story  describing  what  we  have  seen." 
The  antecedent  was  mostly  omitted  : 

"  What'\s  done  (that)  cannot  be  undone." — Macb.  v.  I.  74. 
This  use  is  common  now,  but  we  could  not  say 
"  To  have  his  pomp  and  all  what  (that  which)  state  compounds." 

T.  of  A.  iv.  2.  35. 
The  following  is  a  curious  use  of  what: 

"  That  Julius  Caesar  was  a  famous  man  : 
With  what  his  valour  did  enrich  his  wit 
He  did  set  down  to  make  his  valour  live." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  i.  85  :  i.e.  "  (that)  with  which." 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  173 

253.  What  is  used  for  "for  what,"  "  why  "  (quid),  as  in 
"  What  (why)  shall  I  don  this  robe  and  trouble  you?" 

Cymb.  iii.  4.  34. 
"  What  need  we  any  spur  but  our  own  cause?" 

J.  C.  ii.  i.  123. 

"  What  shall  I  need  to  draw  my  sword?"— T.  A.  i.  r.  189. 

"  WAz/ should  I  stay?"— A.  and  C.  v.  2.  317. 
and  in  some  other  passages  where  the  context  shows  this  to  be 
the  meaning  : 

"  Falstaff.  This  apoplexy  is,  as  I  take  it,  a  kind  of  lethargy. 
Justice.     What  tell  you  me  of  it:  be  it  as  it  is." 

2  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  130. 

The  following  use  of  what  for  "in  what  state,"  i.e.  "how  far 
advanced,"  should  be  noticed  : 

"  M.  What  is  the  night  ? 

Lady  M.   Almost  at  odds  with  morning,  which  is  which." 

Macbeth,  iii.  4.  126. 
These  adverbial  uses  of  -what  are  illustrated  by 

"  His  equal  mind  I  copy  what  I  can 
And,  as  I  love,  would  imitate  the  man." 

POPE,  Imit.  Hor.  ii.  131. 

254.  What  »  "whatever." 

"  What  will  hap  more  to-night,  safe  scape  the  king," 

Lear,  iii.  6.  121. 

where  the  construction  may  be  "Happen  what  will,"  a  comma 
being  placed  after  "will,"  or  "Whatever  is  about  to  happen." 
Probably  the  former  is  correct  and  "will"  is  emphatic,  "hap" 
being  optative. 

What  =  "whoever." 

"  There's  my  exchange.      What  in  the  world  he  is 

That  names  me  traitor,  villain-like  he  lies." — Lear,  v.  3.  97. 
IVhat  is  often  used  apparently  with  no  sense  of  "of  what  kind 
or  quality "  where   we   should  use  who,   especially  in  the  phrase 
"w/Mt  is  he?" 

"  Chief  Justice.    What's  he  that  goes  there  ? 
Servant.   Falstaff,  an't  please  your  lordship." 

2  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  66. 

"  What's  he  that  wishes  so?     My  cousin  Westmoreland  ?" 

Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  18. 


I74  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

" Ros.    What  is  he  that  shall  buy  his  flock  and  pasture? 

Cor.  That  young  swain."— A.  Y.  L.  ii.  4.  88-9. 
"  Captain.   He  did  see  the  love  of  fair  Olivia  ! 
Vio.    Whafsstel 
Captain.  A  virtuous  maid,  the  daughter  of  a  count." 

T.  N.  i.  2.  35  ;  ib.  i.  5.  124. 
So  Lear,  v.  3.  125  ;  Macbeth,  v.  7.  2 ;  Rich.  II.  v.  5.  69. 

But  in  the  Elizabethan  and  earlier  periods,  when  the  distinction 
between  ranks  was  much  more  marked  than  now,  it  may  have 
seemed  natural  to  ask,  as  the  first  question  about  anyone,  "  of  what 
condition  or  rank  is  he?"  In  that  case  the  difference  is  one  of 
thought,  not  of  grammar. 

255.  What  hence  in  elliptical  expressions  assumes  the  meaning 
"any." 

"  I  love  thee  not  a  jar  of  the  clock  behind 

What  lady-she  (224)  her  lord."—  W.  T.  \.  2.  44. 

i.e.  "  less  than  any  lady  whatsoever  loves  her  lord."     So 

"  With  promise  of  his  sister  and  -what  else." 

3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  51  ;   Tempest,  iii.  I.  72. 

i.e.  "  whatever  else  may  be  conceived,"  or  "  everything  else." 
"  What  not  "  is  still  used  in  this  sense,  as 

"  He  that  dares  approach 
On  him,  on  you,  who  not?  I  will  maintain 
Mine  honour  firmly." — Lear,  v.  3.  100:  i.e.  "on  everybody." 

Like  the  Latin  "qua — qua,"  so  "what — what"  is  used  for 
"partly — partly,"  mostly  joined  to  "with."  In  this  collocation 
perhaps  the  alliteration  of  the  two  w's  has  had  some  influence  :  for 
•what  is  not  thus  used  except  before  "with." 

"  And  such  a  flood  of  greatness  fell  on  you 

What  with  our  help,  what  with  the  absent  king, 
What  with  the  injuries  of  a  wanton  time. " 

i  Hen.  IV.  v.  I.  50. 
So  Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  I.  103. 

Originally  this  may  have  been  "  considering  what  accrued  from 
our  help,  what  from  the  king's  absence,"  &c.  but  "what"  is  used 
by  Spenser  in  the  sense  of  "  part,"  "  her  little  -what."  (See  p.  5.) 

256.  What  is  sometimes  used  before  a  noun  without  the  ap- 
pended indefinite  article  in  exclamations.      (See  Article,  86. )     It  is 
also  used  without  a  noun  in  this  sense  : 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  17  S 

'  O  father  Abram,  what  these  Christians  are  !" 

M.  of  V.  \.  3.  162. 

"  What  mortality  is  !" — Cymb.  iv.  i.  16. 
i.e.  "what  a  thing  mortality  is  !" 

257.  Who  for  any  one : 

"  The  cloudy  messenger  turns  me  his  back 
And  hums  as  -who  should  say,  'You'll  rue  the  time 
That  clogs  me  with  this  answer.'" — Macbeth,  iii.  6.  42. 
"  He  doth  nothing  but  frown,  as  who  should  say,  '  If  you  will 

not  have  me,  choose.'  " — M.  of  V.  i.  2.  45. 

Comp.  M.  of  V.  i.  I.  93,  Rich.  II.  v.  4.  8.  In  these  passages  it  is 
possible  to  understand  an  antecedent  to  'who,'  "as,  or  like  (one) 
who  should  say."  But  in  the  passages 

"Timon  surnamed  Misantropos  (as  who  should  say  Loup- 

garou,  or  the  man-hater)." — N.  P.    171. 
"  She  hath  been  in  such  wise  daunted 
That  they  were,  as  who  saifh,  enchanted." 

GOWER,  C.  A.  i.  (quoted  by  Clarke  and  Wright). 

it  is  impossible  to  give  this  explanation.  And  in  Early  Eng. 
(Morris,  Specimens,  p.  xxxii.)  "als  wha  say  "  was  used  for  "as  any 
one  may  say."  Comp.  the  Latin  quis  after  si,  num,  &c.  Possibly 
an  (/"is  implied  after  the  as  by  the  use  of  the  subjunctive.  (See  107.) 
Littre  explains  "  comme  qui  dirait  "  by  supplying  "  celui."  "  11 
portait  sur  sa  tes(e  comme  qui  dirait  un  turban ;  c'est-a-dire,  il  portait, 
comme  dirait  celui  qui  dirait  un  turban."  But  this  explanation 
seems  unsatisfactory,  in  making  a  likeness  to  exist  between  "  carry- 
ing "  and  "saying."  But  whatever  may  be  the  true  explanation  of 
the  original  idiom,  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  understood  who  as 
the  relative,  for  the  antecedent  can  be  supplied  in  all  passages  where 
he  uses  it,  as  J.  C.  i.  2.  120,  "As  who  goes  farthest." 

258.  That,  Which,  Who,  difference  between.  Whatever  rule 
may  be  laid  down  for  the  Elizabethan  use  of  the  three  relative  forms 
will  be  found  to  have  many  exceptions.  Originally  that  was  the 
only  relative  ;  and  if  Wickliffe's  version  of  the  New  Testament  be 
compared  with  the  versions  of  the  sixteenth  century  and  with  that 
of  1611,  that  will  be  found  in  the  former  replaced  by  which  and 
ii'ho  in  the  latter,  who  being  especially  common  in  the  latest,  our 
Authorized  Version.  Even  in  Shakespeare's  time,  however,  there 
is  great  diversity  of  usage.  Fletcher,  in  the  Faithful  Shepherdess 


176  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

(with  the  exception  of  a  few  lines  containing  the  plot,  and  probably 
written  by  Beaumont),  scarcely  uses  any  relative  but  the  smooth 
that  throughout  the  play  (in  the  first  act  ivhich  is  only  used  once) ; 
and  during  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  lan- 
guage threw  off  much  of  its  old  roughness  and  vigour,  the  fashion 
of  Wickliffe  was  revived.  That  came  into  favour  not  because,  as 
in  Wickliffe's  time,  it  was  the  old-established  relative,  but  because 
it  was  the  smoothest  form  :  the  convenience  of  three  relative  forms, 
and  the  distinctions  between  their  different  shades  of  meaning,  were 
ignored,  and  that  was  re-established  in  its  ancient  supremacy. 
Addison,  in  his  "  Humble  Petition  of  Who  and  Which,"  allows  the 
petitioners  to  say:  "We  are  descended  of  ancient  families,  and 
kept  up  our  dignity  and  honour  many  years,  till  the  jack-sprat 
That  supplanted  us. "  But  the  supplanting  was  a  restoration  of  an 
incapable  but  legitimate  monarch,  rather  than  a  usurpation.  Since 
the  time  of  Addison  a  reaction  has  taken  place  ;  the  convenience  of 
the  three  distinct  forms  has  been  recognized,  and  we  have  returned 
somewhat  to  the  Elizabethan  usage. 

259.  As  regards  the  Shakespearian  use,  the  following  rules  will 
generally  hold  good  : — 

(1)  That  is  used  as  a  relative  (a)  after  a  noun  preceded  by  the 
article,  (6)  after  nouns  used  vocatively,  in  order  to  complete  the 
description  of  the  antecedent  by  adding  some  essential  characteristic 
of  it. 

(2)  Who  is  used  (a)  as  the  relative  to  introduce  a.  fact  about  the 
antecedent.     It  may  often  be  replaced  by  "and  he,"  "for  he," 
"though  he,"  &c.     (b)  It  is  especially  used  after  antecedents  that 
are  lifeless  or  irrational,  when  personification  is  employed,  but  not 
necessarily  after  personal  pronouns. 

(3)  Which  is  used  (a)  in  cases  where  the  relative  clause  varies 
between  an  essential  characteristic  and  an  accidental  fact,  especially 
where  the  antecedent  is  preceded  by  that ;  (b)  where  the  antecedent 
is  repeated  in  the  relative  clause;  (c)  in  the   form    "the  which," 
where  the  antecedent  is  repeated,  or  where  attention  is  expressly 
called  to  the  antecedent,  mostly  in  cases  where  there  is  more  than 
one  possible  antecedent  and  care  is  required  to  distinguish  the  real 
one;   (d)  where  "which"  means  "a  circumstance  which,"  the  cir- 
cumstance being  gathered  from  the  previous  sentence. 


RELA  TIVE  PRONO UNS.  1 77 

260.  That.  («)  Since  that  introduces  an  essential  characteristic 
without  which  the  description  is  not  complete,  it  follows  that,  even 
where  this  distinction  is  not  marked,  that  comes  generally  nearer  to 
the  antecedent  than  who  or  which. 

"To  think  of  the  teen  that  I  have  turn'd  you  to 
Which  is  from  my  remembrance  !" — Temp.  i.  2.  65. 
I  to  the  world  am  like  a  drop  of  water 
That  in  the  ocean  seeks  another  drop, 
Who  falling  there  to  seek  his  fellow  forth, 
Unseen,  inquisitive,  confounds  himself." — C.of  E.  i.  2.  37. 

"  You  have  oft  enquired 
After  the  shepherd  that  complain  d  of  love, 
Who  you  saw  sitting  by  me  on  the  turf."—  A.  Y.L.  iii.  4.  52. 

"And  here's  a  prophet  that  I  brought  with  me 
From  forth  the  streets  of  Pomfret,  whom  I  found 
With  many  hundreds  treading  on  his  heels."— K.  J.  iv.2.148. 

The  same  order  is  preserved  in  A.  Y.  L.  iii.  5.  13  ;  2  Hen.  IV. 

i.  3.  59  ;  Lear,  iii.  4.   134-139  ;    2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  3  ;   Lear,  iv.  2. 

51-53  (where  we  find  that,  who,  that,  consecutively) ;  Lear,  iii.  7. 

89,  90  ;  I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  i.  80  (that,  the  which,  that};  Tempest,  iv.  i.  76. 

The  distinction  between  that  and  which  is  preserved  in 

"  It  is  an  heretic  that  (by  nature,  of  necessity)  makes  the  fire, 
Not  she  which  (as  an  accidental  fact)  burns  in  it. " 

W.  T.  ii.  3.  115. 

"  And  he  doth  sin  that  doth  belie  the  dead, 
Not  he  which  (as  you  do)  says  the  dead  is  not  alive." 

2  Hen.  IV.  i.  i.  99. 

In  the  latter  passage  "he  that"  =  "who-so,"  and  refers  to  a  class, 
"he  which"  to  the  single  person  addressed.  Thus  Wickliffe 
(Matt,  xxiii.  21)  has  "he  that  sweareth,"  whereas  the  other  versions 
have  "whoso"  or  "whosoever  sweareth." 

That  is  generally  used  after  he,  all,  aught,  &c.  where  a  class  is 
denoted.  This  is  so  common  as  not  to  require  examples,  and  it  is 
found  even  where  thatis  objective. 

"  He  that  a  fool  doth  very  wisely  hit." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  53. 
In  "The  great  globe  itself, 

Yea,  all  which  it  inherit," — Temp.  iv.  I.  154. 
euphony  perhaps  will  not  allow  "  that  it."     (See  Which,  265.) 
The  following  is  not  an  exception  : 

"  It  was  the  swift  celerity  of  his  death, 
Which  I  did  think  with  slower  foot  came  on, 
That  brain'd  my  purpose." — M.  for  M.  v.  I.  400. 
N 


178  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

for  here  which  is  used  parenthetically  (see  271).  So  Rich.  II.  iii. 
4.  50. 

In     "He  that  no  more  must  say  is  listen'd  more 

Than  they  whom  youth  and  ease  have  taught  to  glose." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  9,  10. 

a  distinction  appears  to  be  drawn  between  the  singular  nominative 
represented  by  the  uninflected  that,  and  the  objective  plural  repre- 
sented by  the  inflected  whom. 

261.  That.    (t>)  After  nouns  used  vocatively. 

"Hail,  many-coloured  messenger!  that  .ne'er 
Dost  disobey  the  wife  of  Jupiter.: 
Who  with  thy  saffron  wings  upon  my  flowers 
Diffuses!  honey-drops,  refreshing  showers." 

Temp.  iv.  J.  76-79. 

"  Hast  thou  conspired  with  thy  brother,  too, 
That  for  thine  own  gain  shouldst  defend  mine  honour  ?" 

K.  J.  i.  I.  242. 

"Yon  brother  mine,  that  entertain'd  ambition, 
Expell'd  remorse  and  nature  ;  -who  with  Sebastian 
Would  here  have  kill'd  your  king. " 

Tempest^  v.  I.  79  ;  33-9. 

This  close  dependence  of  that  on  the  antecedent,  wherein  it  differs 
from  who  and  which,  is  a  natural  result  of  its  being  less  emphatic,  and 
therefore  less  independent,  than  the  two  other  forms.  When  the 
relative  is  necessarily  emphatic,  as  at  the  end  of  a  verse,  we  may 
sometimes  expect  that  to  be  replaced  by  which,  for  that  and  no 
other  reason. 

"Sometimes  like  apes  that  mow  and  chatter  at  me, 
And  after  bite  me  ;  then  like  hedgehogs  -which 
Lie  tumbling  in  my  bare-foot  way." — Temp.  ii.  2.  10. 

262.  That  is  sometimes,  but  seldom,  separated  from  the  antece- 
dent, like  who.     (See  263. ) 

"  As  if  it  were  Cain's  jawbone  that  did  the  first  murder." 

Hamlet,  v.  I.  85. 

It  is  perhaps  not  uncommon  after  the  possessive  case  of  nouns  and 
pronouns.  (See  218.)  The  antecedent  pronoun  is  probably  to  be 
repeated  immediately  before  the  relative. 

"  Cain's  jawbone,  (him)  //fo/did,"  &c. 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  179 

Less  commonly  as  in 

"  They  know  the  corn 

Was  not  our  recompense,  resting  well  assured 
That  ne'er  did  service  for  it."— Coriol.  iii.  I.  122. 
The  use  of  that  for  who  =  "  and  they  "  is  archaic.     Acts  xiii.  43 : 
"  They  sueden  Paul  and  Barnabas  that  spakun  and  coun  ceiled  en 
hym."     Tyndale,  Cranmer,  and  Geneva  have  which;  Rheims  and 
A.  V.  who. 

263.  Who  (a)  for  "and  he,"  "for  he,"  &c. 

"Now  presently  I'll  give  her  father  notice 
Of  their  disguising  and  pretended  flight ; 
Who  (and  he),  all  enraged,  will  banish  Valentine." 

T.  G.ofV.  ii.  6.  38. 

"  My  name  is  Thomas  Mowbray,  duke  of  Norfolk, 
Who  (and  I)  hither  come  engaged  by  my  oath 
Against  the  duke  of  Norfolk  that  (because  he)  appeals  me  " 

Rich.  II.  13.  17. 
"  Caius  Ligarius  doth  bear  Caesar  hard 

Who  (since  he)  rated  him  for  speaking  well  of  Pompey." 

J.  C.  ii.  i.  216. 
Hence  who  is  often  at  some  distance  from  the  antecedent. 

"Archbishop.  It  was  young  Hotspur's  case  at  Shrewsbury. 
Lord  Bardolph.   It  was,  my  lord  :  who  (for  he)  lined  himself 

with  hope."— 2  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  27. 
"  To  send  the  old  and  miserable  king 
To  some  retention  and  appointed  guard, 
Whose  (for  his)  age  has  charms  in  it. " — Ltar,  v.  3.  48. 
"  I  leave  him  to  your  gracious  acceptance ;  whose  (for  his)  trial 
shall  better  publish  his. commendation." — M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  165. 
"  In  Ephesus  I  am  but  two  hours  old, 
As  strange  unto  your  town  as  to  your  talk, 
WJio  (and  I),  every  word  by  all  my  wit  being  scann'd, 
Want  wit,  in  all,  one  word  to  understand." 

C.  ofE.  iii.  2.  153. 
So  Temp.  iii.  i.  93  ;  A.  and  C.  \.  3.  29  ;  Hen.  V.  i.  Prologue,  33. 

264.  Who  personifies  irrational  antecedents.    (3)  Who 

is  often  used   of  animals,   particularly  in  similes  where  they  are 
compared  to  men. 

'  I  am  the  cygnet  to  this  pale  faint  swan, 
WJio  chants  a  doleful  hymn  to  his  own  death. "— K.  J.  v.  7. 22. 
"  Or  as  a  bear  encompass'd  round  with  dogs, 
Who  having  pinch'd  a  few  and  made  them  cry." 

3  Hen.  VL  ii.  i.  16. 

N   2 


i8o  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So   I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  10  ;    2  Hen.  VI.   iii.   I.  253,    v.   I.   153  ; 
•  but  also  in  other  cases  where  action  is  attributed  to  them,  e.g. 

"A  lion  -who  glared. "-J.  C.  i.  3.  21. 

"  A  lioness  "who  quickly  fell  before  him." — A.  Y.  L.  iv.  2.  13. 

Who  is  also  used  of  inanimate  objects  regarded  as  persons. 

"The  winds 
Who  take  the  ruffian  billows  by  the  tops."—2ffen.  IV.  iii.  I.  22. 

So  R.  andj.  i.  i.  119 ;  i.  4.  100  :  "The  winds  .  .  .  who" 

"  Rotten  opinion,  -who  hath  writ  me  down 

After  my  seeming." — 2  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  128. 
"Night.  .  .  who." -Hen.  V.  iv.  Prol.  21. 

' '  Your  anchors,  who 
Do  their  best  office  if  they  can  but  stay  you."—  W..  71  iv.  4.  581. 

"A  queen 

Over  her  passion,  who  most  rebel-like 
Sought  to  be  queen  o'er  her." — Lear,  iv.  2.  16. 

So  probably  in 

"Your  eye 
Who  hath  cause  to  wet  the  grief  on  \."— Tempest,  ii..i.  127. 

i.e.  "your  eye  which  has  cause  to  give  tearful  expression  to  the 
sorrow  for  your  folly." 

"My  arm'd  knee 
Wfo-bow'd  but  in  my  stirrups." — Corlol.  iii.  2.  119. 

But  is  who  the  antecedent  here  to  "me  "  implied  in  "my?"     (See 
218.) 

"The  heart 
Who  great  and  pufTd  up  with  this  retinue." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  120. 

So   V.  and  A.  191  and  1043,   "her  heart.  .  .who;"    T.  A.  iii. 
2.  9,  "my  breast  .  .  .  who" 

The  slightest  active  force,  or  personal  feeling,  attributed  to  the 
antecedent,  suffices  to  justify  who.     Thus  : 

"  The  dispers'd  air  who  answer*  d." — R.  of  L.  1805. 

"Applause 

Who  like  an  arch  reverberates."— Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  120. 
'  Therefore  I  tell  my  sorrows  to  the  stones 
Who  though  they  cannot  answer,"  &c.— T.  A.  iii.  I.  38. 

"Bushes, 
As  fearful  of  him,  part,  through  whom  he  rushes." 

V.  and  A.  630. 


RELA  TIVE  PRO  NO  UNS.  1 8 1 

So  "her  body  .  .  .  who"  R.  of  L.  1740;  "the  hairs  who  wave," 
V.  and  A.  306;  "lips  who  .  .  .  still  blush,"  R.  and  J.  iii.  3.  38  ; 
"sighs  who"  R.  and  J.  iii.  5.  136  ;  "mouths  who,"  P.  of  T.  \.  4. 
33  ;  "palates  who"  P.  of  T.  i.  4.  39  ;  "her  eyelids  who  like  sluices 
stopped,"  V.  and  A.  Sometimes  who  is  used  where  there  is  no 
notion  of  personality : 

"  The  world,  who  of  itself  is  peised  well,"— K.  J.  ii.  i.  575. 
where  perhaps  who  is  used  because  of  the  pause  after  "world,"  in 
the  sense  "though  it."  (See  263.)  If  there  had  been  no  comma  be- 
tween "world"  and  the  relative,  we  should  have  had  that  or  whith. 

Perhaps  in  this  way  we  may  distinguish  in 

"  The  first,  of  gold,  who  this  inscription  bears  ; 
The  second,  silver,  which  this  promise  carries." 

M.ofV,  ii.  7.  4. 

i.e.  "the  first  of  gold,  and  it  bears  this  inscription;  the  second, 
(silver,)  which  carries,"  &c.  In  the  first  the  material,  in  the  second 
the  promise,  is  regarded  as  the  essential  quality.  [Or  does  euphony 
prefer  which  in  the  accented,  who  in  the  unaccented  syllables  ?] 

In  almost  all  cases  where  who  is  thus  used,  an  action  is  implied, 
so  that  who  is  the  subject. 
Whom  is  rare. 

"  The  elements 
Of  whom  your  swords  are  temper'd. " —  Temp.  iii.  2.  62. 

265.  Which  (E.  E.  adj.  hw-ilc, "  wh (a) -like")  is  used  inter- 
changeably With  Who  and  That.  It  is  interchanged  with  who 
in 

"  Then  Warwick  disannuls  great  John  of  Gaunt, 
Which  did  subdue  the  greatest  part  of  Spain  ; 

And,  after  that  wise  prince,  Henry  the  Fifth, 
Who  by  his  power  conquered  all  France." 

3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  87. 
Like  who  (263),  which  implies  a  cause  in 

"  Deposing  thee  before  thou  wert  possess'd, 
Which  (for  thou)  art  possess'd  now  to  depose  thyself." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  108. 

It  is  often  used  for  that  (see  261),  where  the  personal  antecedent 
is  vocatively  used  or  preceded  by  the  article  : 

"  The  mistress  which  I  serve."—  Temp.  iii.  I.  6. 
So  M.  for  M.  v.  i.  305 ;   W.  T.  i.  2.  455,  v.  2.  60. 


182  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Abhorred  slave, 

WJiich  any  point  of  goodness  will  not  take." — Temp.  i.  2.  352. 
' '  And  thou,  great  goddess  Nature,  which  hast  made  it. " 

W.  T.  ii.  3.  104. 
So  in  our  version  of  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

266.  Which,  like  that,  is  less  definite  than  who.      Who  indicates 
an  individual,  which  a  "kind  of  person  ;"  who  is  "qui,"  which 
"qualis." 

"  I  have  known  those  which  (qualis}  have  walked  in  their  sleep 
who  (and  yet  they,  263)  have  died  holily  in  their  beds." — Macb. 
v.  I.  66. 

"  For  then  I  pity  those  I  do  not  know 

Which  (unknown  persons)  a  dismiss'd  offence  would  after  gall." 

M.forM.  ii.  2.  102. 

"They  have — as  who  have  not,  that  their  great  stars 
Throned  and  set  high  ? — servants,  who  seem  no  less, 
Which  are  to  France  the  spies  and  speculations 
Intelligent  of  our  state."— Lear,  iii.  i.  24. 

Here  "who  seem  no  less"  is  parenthetical,  and  for  who  might  be 
written  "they."  Which  means  " of  such  a  kind  that."  Where 
"so  dear,"  "such,"  &c.  is  implied  in  the  antecedent,  we  may  ex- 
pect the  corresponding  which  (278)  in  the  relative  : 

"  Antonio,  I  am  married  to  a  wife 

Which  is  as  dear  to  me  as  life  itself."— M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  283. 
When  the  antecedent  is  personal  and  plural,  which  is  generally 
preferred  to  who.      Which,  like  that  (260),  often  precedes  who. 

"  I  am  Prospero,  and  that  very  duke 
Which  was  thrust,  from  Milan,  who"  &c.  —  Tempest,  v.  I.  160. 

267.  The  . .  .  that ;  that .  .  .  which.    In  A.-S.  "t>e"  (the) 

was  the  relative  and  "se  "  the  article.  When  the  form  ">e"  (the) 
became  the  article,  "that"  became  the  relative.  In  the  same  way  it 
perhaps  arises  that  when  that  was  applied  to  the  antecedent,  the 
relative  form  preferred  by  Shakespeare  was  which.  "  The  man  that 
says"  =  "whoever  says,"  and  the  indefinite://^/  is  sufficient;  but 
"that  man,"  being  more  definite,  requires  a  more  definite  relative. 
After  a  proper  name,  who  would  answer  the  purpose  ;  but  after 
"  that  man,"  that  being  an  adjective,  "  which  man  "  was  the  natural 
expression,  which  being  originally  also  an  adjective.  Hence  the 
marked  change  in 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  183 

"  If  he  sees  aught  in  you  that  makes  him  like 

That  anything  he  sees  which  moves  his  liking." — K.  J.  ii.  I.  52. 
"  When  living  blood  doth  in  these  temples  beat 

Which  owe  the  crown  that  thou  o'er-masterest. " — Ib.  ii.  I.  109. 

Possibly  "that"  is  a  demonstrative,  and  "he"  is  used  for  "man" 
in  the  following,  which  will  account  for  the  use  of  which  ;  but  more 
probably  which  is  here  used  for  thai,  and  there  is  a  confusion  of 
constructions. 

"  Rather  proclaim  it,  Westmoreland,  through  our  host, 
That  he  which  hath  no  stomach  to  this  fight, 
Let  him  depart." — Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  34.* 

268.  Which  more  definite  than  That.    Generally  it  will  be 

found  that  which  is  more  definite  than  that.     Which  follows  a  name, 
that  a  pronoun : 

"  Here's  the  Lord  Say  which  sold  the  towns  in  France  ;  he  that 
made  us  pay  one-and-twenty  fifteens. "  —2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  5.  23. 

Sometimes  which  is  used  in  this  sense  to  denote  an  individual 
or  a  defined  class,  while  that  denotes  a  hypothetical  person  or  an 
indefinite  class.  Hence 

"  And  such  other  gambol  faculties  a?  has,  that  show  a  weak  mind 
and  an  able  body,  for  the  which  the  Prince  admits  him." — 2  Hen. 
IV.  ii.  4.  74. 

And  compare 

"  She  that  was  ever  fair  and  never  proud,  &c. 

She  was  a  wight,  if  ever  such  wight  were" — Othello^  ii.  I.  149. 
with  "  I  find  that  she  which  late 

Was  in  my  nobler  thoughts  most  base,  is  now 
The  praised  of  the  king  :  who  (263),  so  ennobled, 
Is  as  'twere  born  so." — A.   W.  ii.  3.  179. 
"  It  is  a  chance  which  does  redeem  all  sorrows 

That  I  have  ever  felt." — Lear,  v.  3.  266. 
Which  states  a  fact,  that  a  probability,  in 

"  Why,  Harry,  do  I  tell  thee  of  my  foes, 
Which  art  my  near'st  and  dearest  enemy  ? 
Thou  that  art  like  enough." — I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  124. 
In  "Cut  off  the  heads  of  too  fast  growing  sprays 
That  look  too  lofty  in  our  commonwealth  : 
You  thus  employ'd,  I  will  go  root  away 
The  noisome  weeds  which,  without  profit,  suck 
The  soil's  fertility  from  wholesome  flowers." — Rich.  II.  iii  4.37. 

*  See  415  ajid  compare  T.  A.  iii.  i.  151  ;  Lear,  ii.  i.  63. 


1 84  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  must  explain  "  all  the  heads  that  may  happen  to  look  too  lofty, 
and  the  weeds  which,  as  a  fact,  suck  the  fertility,"  &c. 

So  that  introduces  an  essential,  and  -which  an  accidental,  or  at  all 
events  a  less  essential  quality,  in  the  two  following  passages  : — 
"(Thou)  commit'st  thy  anointed  body  to  the  cure 
Of  those  physicians  that  first  wounded  thee." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  99. 
"  Now  for  our  Irish  wars. 

We  must  supplant  those  rough,  rug-headed  kerns, 
Which  live  like  venom  where  no  venom  else, 
But  only  they,  have  privilege  to  live."—  Ib.  157. 
That  may  state  a  fact  with  a  notion  of  purpose  : 

"Now,  sir,  the  sound  that  tells  (i.e.  to  tell)  what  hour  it  is 
Are  clamorous  groans  which  strike  upon  my  heart, 
Which  is  the  bell."— Rich.  II.  v.  5.  57. 

269.  Which  with  repeated  antecedent.    Which  being  an 

adjective  frequently  accompanies  the  repeated  antecedent,  where 
definiteness  is  desired,  or  where  care  must  be  taken  to  select  the 
right  antecedent. 

"     Salisbury.  What  other  harm  have  I,  good  lady,  done 
But  spoke  the  harm  that  is  by  others  done  ? 

Constance.    Which  harm  within  itself  so  heinous  is — " 

K.  J.  iii.  i.  39. 
1 '  And,  if  she  did  play  false,  the  fault  was  hers, 

Which  fault  lies,"  &c.—  K.  J.  i.  I.  119  ;  Rich.  II.  i.  i.  104. 
This  may  sometimes  explain  why  which  is  used  instead  of  that, 
and  why  that  is  preferred  after  pronouns  : 

"  Let  my  revenge  on  her  that  injured  thee 
Make  less  a  fault  which  I  intended  not." — F.  Sh.  v.  i. 

An  antecedent  noun  ("fault")  can  be  repeated,  and  therefore 
can  be  represented  by  the  relative  which  ;  an  antecedent  pronoun 
"her"  cannot. 

Sometimes  a  noun  of  similar  meaning  supplants  the  antecedent : 

"  Might'st  bespice  a  cup 
To  give  mine  enemy  a  lasting  wink, 
Which  draught  to  me  were  cordial."—  W.  T.  i.  2.  318 

270.  The   which.     The  above   repetition    is,    perhaps,    more 
common  with  the  definite  "the  which"  : 

"  The  better  part  of  valour  is  discretion  ;  in  the  which  better  part 
I  have  saved  my  life."— I  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  125. 


RELATIVE  PRONOUNS.  185 

Sometimes  the  noun  qualified  by  "which  is  not  repeated,  and  only 
slightly  implied  in  the  previous  sentence  : 

"Under  an  oak  .  .  .  to  the  which  place. "— - A.  Y.  L.  ii.  I.  33. 
"Let  gentleness  my  strong  enforcement  be, 
In  the  which  hope  I  blush."— Ib.  ii.  7.  119. 

The  question  may. arise  why  "  the"  is  attached  to  which  and  not 
to  who.  (The  instance 

"  Your  mistress  from  the  whom  I  see 
There's  no  disjunction," — W.  T.  iv.  4.  539. 

is,  perhaps,  unique  in  Shakespeare. )  The  answer  is,  that  who  is 
considered  definite  already,  and  stands  for  a  noun,  while  which 
is  considered  as  an  indefinite  adjective  ;  just  as  in  French  we  have 
"A>quel,"  but  not  "/<?qui."  "  The  w/*/M  "  is  generally  used  either 
as  above,  where  the  antecedent,  or  some  word  like  the  antecedent, 
is  repeated,  or  else  where  such  a  repetition  could  be  made  if 
desired.  In  almost  all  cases  there  are  two  or  more  possible  antece- 
dents from  which  selection  must  be  made.  (The  use  of  "/quel" 
is  similar. ) 

' '  To  make  a  monster  of  the  multitude,  of  the  which  (multitude) 
we  being  members  should  bring  ourselves  to  be  monstrous  members. " 
—  Coriol.  ii.  3.  10. 

"  Lest  your  justice 
Prove  violence,  in  the  which  (violence)  three  great  ones  suffer. " 

W.  T.  ii.  I.  128. 
"  Eight  hundred  nobles 

In  name  of  lendings  for  your  highness'  soldiers, 
The  which  (nobles)  he  hath  detain'd  for  lewd  employments." 

Rich.  II.  i.  I.  90. 

"  The  which  "  is  also  naturally  used  after  a  previous  "  which." 

"The  present  business 

Which  now's  upon  us  :  without  the  which  this  story 
Were  most  impertinent." — Temp.  i.  I.  138. 

"The  chain 

Which  God  he  knows  I.  saw  not,  for  the  which 
He  did  arrest  me."—  C.  of  E.  v.  I.  230. 

271.  Which  for  "  which  thing,"  often  parenthetically. 

"  Camillo, 

As  you  are  certainly  a  gentleman,  thereto 
Clerk-like  experienced,  which  no  less  adorns 
Our  gentry,  than  our  parents'  noble  names. " —  W.  T.  i.  2.  392. 


1 86  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Very  often  the  "  thing"  must  be  gathered  not  from,  what  precedes 
but  from  what  follows,  as  in 

"  And,  which  became  him  like  a  prince  indeed, 

He  made  a  blushing  'cital  of  himself." — I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  62. 
"  And,  which  was  strange,  the  one  so  like  the  other 
As  could  not  be  distinguished." — C.  of  E.  i.  I.  53. 
That  is  rarely  thus  used  by  Shakespeare  : 

"  And,  that  is  worse, 

The  Lord  Northumberland,  his  son  young  Henry  Percy, 
With  all  their  powerful  friends,  are  fled  to  him." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  55. 

Often,  however,  in  our  A.  V.  that  in  "that  is,  being  interpreted," 
is  the  relative,  though  a  modern  reader  would  not  perceive  it. 

"I  was  never  so  berhymed  since  Pythagoras'  time  that  (when)  I 
was  an  Irish  cat,  -which  I  can  hardly  remember." — A.  KZ.iii.2.188. 

"I'll  resolve  you, 

Which  to  you  shall  seem  probable,  of  every 
These  happen'd  accidents."—  Temp.  v.  I.  249. 

i.e.  "  I  will  explain  to  you  (and the  explanation  shall  seem  probable) 

every  one  of  these  accidents." 

"  My  honour's  at  the  stake,  which  (danger)  to  defeat 
I  must  produce  my  power." — A.   W.  ii.  3.  156. 

"  Even  as  I  have  tried  in  many  other  occurrences,  -which  Caesar 
affirmed  (ce  que  dit  Cesar),  that  often,"  &c.— MONTAIGNE,  36. 

272.  Which  for  "as  to  which."  Hence  which  and  "the 
•which"  are  loosely  used  adverbially  for  "as  to  which."  So  in 
Latin,  "  quod"  in  "  quod  si." 

"  Showers  of  blood, 

The  -which  how  far  off  from  the  mind  of  Bolingbroke 
It  is  such  crimson  tempest  should  bedew,"  &c. 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  45. 

"  With  unrestrained  loose  companions — 
Even  such,  they  say,  as  stand  in  narrow  lanes, 
And  beat  our  watch,  and  rob  our  passengers  ; 
Which  he,  young,  wanton,  and  effeminate  boy, 
Takes  on  the  point  of  honour,  to  support 
So  dissolute  a  crew." — Rich.  II.  v.  3.  10. 
"  But  God  be  thanked  for  prevention  ; 
Which  I  in  sufferance  heartily  will  rejoice." 

Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  159. 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.  187 

273.  Which.     It  is  hard  to  explain  the  following  : 

"A  mote  will  turn  the  balance  which  Pyramus  which  Thisbe  is 
the  better."— J£  N.  D.  v.  I.  325. 
unless  which  is  used  for  the  kindred  "  whether." 

In     "  My  virtue  or  my  plague,  be  it  either  which" 

Hamlet,  iv.  7.  13. 

there  is  perhaps  a  confusion  between  "be  it  either"  and  "be  it 
whichever  of  the  two."  Perhaps,  however,  "  either"  may  be  taken 
in  its  original  sense  of  "one  of  the  two,"  so  that  "either  which"  is 
"which-one-so-ever  of  the  two;" 

274.  Who  for  whom.     The  inflection  of  who  is  frequently  neg- 
lected. 

"  Who  I  myself  struck  down."— Macbeth,  iii.  r.  123. 

"  Who  does  the  wolf  love  ?    The  lamb."—  Coriol.  iii  x.  8. 
Compare  W.  T.  iv.  4.  66,  v.  I.  109. 

Apparently  it  is  not  so  common  to  omit  the  m  when  the  whom 
is  governed  by  a  prepositkm'whose  contiguity  demands  the  inflection: 

"  There  is  a  mystery  with  whom  relation 
Durst  never  meddle." — Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  20L 

Compare  especially, 

"  Consider  who  the  king  your  father  sends, 
To  whom  he  sends." — L.  L.  L.  ii.  I.  2. 

The  interrogative  is  found  without  the  inflection  even^  after  a  pre- 
position : 

"C.  Yield  thee,  thief. 

Gui.  To  who?"—  Cymb.  iv.  2.  75;  Othello,  i.  2.  52. 

"Vri&wAor—OtMb,  iv.  2.  99. 
And  in  a  dependent  question : 

"The  dead  man's  knell 

Is  there  scarce  asked  for  who" — Macbeth^  iv.  3.  171. 
In  the  following,  who  is  not  the  object  of  the  preposition  : 
"  This  is  a  creature  .  .  .  might  make  proselytes 
Of  who  she  but  bid  follow."— JK  T.  v.  I.  109. 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS. 

275. — So  as.  Bearing  in  mind  that  as  is  simply  a  contraction 
for  "ail-so"  ("alse,"  "als,"  "as"),  we  shall  not  be  surprised  at 
some  interchanging  of  so  and  as. 


i88  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  still  retain  "as  .  .  .  so":  "As  I  had  expected  so  it  happened," 
but  seldom  use  " so  .  .  .  as,"  preferring  "as  . .  .  as;"  except  where  J0 
(as  in  the  above  phrase)  requires  special  emphasis.  The  Elizabethans 
frequently  used  so  before  as. 

"So  well  thy  words  become  thee^j  thy  wounds." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  43. 

"Look  I  so  pale,  Lord  Dorset,  as  the  rest  ?" 

Rich.  III.  ii.  i.  83. 

"And  with  a  look  so  piteous  in  purport 
As  if  he  had  been  loosed  out  of  hell." — Hamlet,  ii.  I.  82. 

"  Thou  art  so  full  of  fear 
As  one  with  treasure  laden." — V.  and  A. 

"  Fair  and  fair  and  twice  so  fair 
As  any  shepherd  may  be." — PEELE. 

"  All  so  soon  as."—R.  and  J.  i.  I.  140. 

This  is  not  very  common  in  Shakespeare.  Nor  is  it  common  to 
find  so  for  as  where  the  clause  containing  the  second  as  is  implied 
but  not  expressed. 

"  Make  us  partakers  of  a  little  gain, 
That  now  our  loss  might  be  ten  times  so  much. " 

I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  53. 

If  the  relatival  as  precedes,  so,  not  as,  must  follow  as  the  demon- 
strative. The  exception  below  is  explicable  as  being  a  repetition  of 
a  previous  as  used  demonstratively  : 

"  As  little  joy,  my  lord,  as  you  suppose 
You  should  enjoy,  were  you  this  country's  king, 
As  little  joy  may  you  suppose  in  me 
That  I  enjoy."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  153. 
"  That "  is  the  relative. 

Ben  Jonson  (p.  789)  writes  as  follows  on  so  and  as:  "  When  the 
comparison  is  in  quantity,  then  so  goeth  before  and  as  followeth. 
'Men  wist  in  thilk  time  none 
So  fair  a  wight  as  she  was  one.' — GOWER,  lib.  I. 
But  if  the  comparison  be  in  quality,  then  it  is  contrary. 
'  For,  as  the  fish,  if  it  be  dry, 
Mote,  in  default  of  water  dye  : 
Right  so  without  air  or  live, 
No  man  ne  beast  might  thrive.' — GOWER." 
So  as  is  frequently  used  for  so  that.     (See  109.) 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.  189 

This  construction  is  generally  found  with   the   past   and   future 
indicative,  but  we  sometimes  find  "so  as  he  may  see,"  for  "so  that 
he  may  see."     "  So  as  "  is  followed  by  the  subjunctive  in 
"  And  lead  these  testy  rivals  so  astray 

As  one  come  not  within  another's  way." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  359. 
Compare  the  use  of  us  with  the  subjunctive  in  Greek.     There 
is  no  more  reason  for  saying,  "I  come  so  that  (i.e.  in  which  way) 
I  may  see,"  than  for  saying,    "  I  come  so  as  (i.e.  in  which  way)  I 
may  see. "     We  sometimes  find  so  as  that  for  so  as  in  this  sense. 
The  so  is  omitted  after  as  in  the  adjurations 
"As  ever  thou  wilt  deserve  well  at  my  hands,  (so)  help  me  to  a 
candle,"—  T.  N.  iv.  2.  86. 

where  as  means  "in  which  degree,"  and-.ro  "in  that  degree."   Hence 
as  approximates  to  "if." 

It  would  seem  that  "  as  .  .  .so"  are  both  to  be  implied  from  the 
previous  verse  in 

"  Had  you  been  as  wise  as  bold, 
(As)  young  in  limbs,  (so)  in  judgment  old." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  7.  71. 

276.  As  ...  as.     The  first  As  is  sometimes  omitted  : 
"A  mighty  and  a  fearful  head  they  are 

As  ever  offered  foul  play  in  a  state." — I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  168. 
"  He  pants  and  looks  (as)  pale  as  if  a  bear  were  at  his  heels." 

T.  N.  iii.  4.  323;  Tempest,  v.  i.  289. 

In  the  expression  "old  as  I  am,"  &c.  we  almost  always  omit  the 
first  as.     Shakespeare  often  inserts  it : 

"As  near  the  dawning,  provost,  as  it  is." — M.  for  M.  iv.  2.  97. 
"But  I  believe,  as  cold  a  night  as  'tis,  he  could  wish  himself  in 
Thames  up  to  the  neck." — Hen.   V.  iv.  I.  118. 

The  expression  is  elliptical  :  "(be  it)  as  cold  as  it  is." 

277.  That  .  .  .  that,  that .  .  .  (as)  to.    That  is  still  used 

provincially  for  such  and   so:    e.g.    "He  is  that  foolish   that  he 
understands  nothing."     So 

"  From  me  whose  love  was  of  that  dignity 
That  it  went  hand  in  hand  even  with  the  vow 
I  made  to  her  in  marriage." — Hamlet,  i.  5.  48. 
That  is  more  precise  than  "  of  that  kind"  or  "such." 
That,  meaning  "  such,"  is  used  before  the  infinitive  where  we  use 
the  less  emphatic  "the." 


190 


SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 


"  Had  you  that  craft  to  reave  her 
Of  what  should  stead  her  most?"— A.   W.  v.  3.  86. 

So  T.  AT.  i.  I.  33 ;  Rich.  III.  i.  4.  257  ;  and  Macbeth,  iv.  3.  374  : 

"There  cannot  be 
That  vulture  in  you  to  devour  so  many." 

This  omission  of  "as"  after  that  meaning  "so,"  is  illustrated  by 
the  omission  of  "as"  after  "so  "  (281). 

278.  Such  which.     Such  (in  Early  English,  "swulc,"  "suilc," 
"suilch,"  "sich")  was  by  derivation  the  natural  antecedent  to 
-which;  such  meaning*  "so-like,"    "so-in-kind;"  -which  meaning 
"  what-like,"  "  what-in-kind  ?  "     Hence — 

"Such  sin 

For  which  the  pardoner  himself  is  in." — M.  for  M.  iv.  2.  111. 
"There  rooted  between  them  such  an  affection  which  cannot 
choose  but  branch  now.  "-W.  T.  i.  I.  26. 

So  W.  T.  iv.  4.  783 ;  Coriol.  iii.  2.  105. 

Compare     "Duty  so  great  -which  wit  so  poor  as  mine 

May  make  seem  bare. " — Sonn.  26. 
Similarly  which  is  irregularly  used  after  ' '  too  : " 
"And  salt  too  little  which  may  season  give 

To  her  foul-tainted  flesh."— M.  Ado,  iv.  I.  144. 
Whom  follows  such  in 

"Such  I  will  have  whom  I  am  sure  .he  knows  not." 

A.  W.  iii.  6.  24. 

279.  Such  that;    so  ...  that  (rel.);   such  .  .  -  where. 

Hence  such  is  used  with  other  relatival  words  : 

"Such  allowed  infirmities  that  honesty 
Is  never  free  oi."—W.  T.  i.  2.  263. 

' '  To  such  a  man 

7^/isno  naming  tell-tale,  "—y.  C.  i.  3.  116. 
"  For  who  so  firm  that  cannot  be  seduced."—y  C.  i.  2.  316. 
"  His  mother  was  a  witch,  and  one  so  strong 

That  could  control  the  moon." — Temp.  v.  I.  270  ;  ib.  315 
"  But  no  perfection  is  so  absolute 
That  some  impunity  doth  not  pollute."—^,  of  L. 

"  Who's  so  gross 
That  seeth  not  this  palpable  device  ?" — Rich.  III.  iii.  6.  11. 

"  Such  things  were 
7>kz/were  most  precious  to  me. "— Macbeth,  iv.  3.  222. 

*  Hence  " suck-like"  (Temp.  iii.  3.  59)  is  a  pleonasm. 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.  191 

"  For  no  man  well  of  such  a  salve  can  speak 
That  heals  the  wound  and  cures  not  the  disgrace." 

Sonn.  34. 

Coriol  iii.  2.  55 ;    T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  70 ;    A.  W.  i.  3.  221 ;    Lear, 
ii.  2.  127  ;  Othello,  iii.  3.  417. 

Hence  it  seems  probable  that  that  is  the  relative,  having  for  its 
antecedent  the  previous  sentence,  in  the  following  passages  from 
Spenser : — 

"  Whose  loftie  trees  yclad  with  summer's  pride 

Did  spred  so  broad  that  heaven's  light  did  hide." — F.  Q.  i.  I.  7. 
"  (He)  Shook  him  so  hard  that  forced  him  to  speak." — 7£.42. 

Similarly  "And  the  search  so  slow 

Wliich  could  not  trace  them." — Cymb.  i.  I.  65. 

The  licence  in  the  use  of  these  words  is  illustrated  by — 
"  In  me  thou  seest  the  twilight  of  such  day 
As,  after  sunset,  fadeth  in  the  west, 
Which  by  and  by  black  night  doth  take  away. 
In  me  thou  seest  the  glowing  of  such  fire 
That  on  the  ashes  of  his  youth  doth  lie 
As  on  the  death-bed." — Sonn.  73. 

In   the  first  case  such  as  is  used,  because  -which  follows  ;    in  the 
second,  such  that,  because  as  follows.     So  Hamlet,  iii.  4.  41-46  : 
' '  Such  an  act  that ....  such  a  deed  as. " 

Such,  so,  where : 

"  Soch  a  schoole  where  the  Latin  tonge  were  properly  and 
perfitlie  spoken." — ASCH.  45. 

"  In  no  place  so  unsanctified 

Where  such  as  thou  mayest  find  him." — Macbeth,  iv.  2.  81. 
"So  narrow  "where  one  but  goes  abreast." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  155. 

280.  That  as.  We  now  use  only  such  with  as,  and  only  that 
with  which.  Since,  however,  such  was  frequently  used  with  which, 
naturally  that  was  also  used  with  as  (in  which  way)  used  for  which. 
Thus  as  approaches  the  meaning  of  a  relative  pronoun. 

"  I  have  not  from  your  eyes  that  gentleness 

As  I  was  wont  to  have."— J.  C.  i.  2.  33. 
"  Under  these  hard  conditions  as  this  time 

Is  like  to  lay  upon  us." — Ib.  174. 


I92  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Those  arts  they  have  as  I  could  put  into  them." 

Cymb.  v.  5.  338. 

"  Methinks  the  realms  of  England,  France,  and  Ireland 
Bear  that  proportion  to  my  flesh  and  blood 
As  did  the  fatal  brand  Althea  burned 
Unto  the  prince's  heart  at  Calydon. "— 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  233. 
"  With  that  ceremonious  affection  as  you  were  wont." 

Lear,  i.  4.  63. 
So  after  this : 

*'  I  beseech  you  do  me  this  courteous  office  as  to  know  what  my 
offence  \s."—T.  N.  iii.  4.  278. 
Similarly 

"  With  hate  in  those  where  I  expect  most  love." 

Rich.  7//.ii.  1.33. 

Either  (i)  the  nominative  is  omitted  (see  399),. or  (2)  as  is  put  for 
-who,  the  relative  to  an  implied  antecedent,  in  : 

"Two  goodly  sons, 

And,  which  was  strange,  the  one  so  like  the  other 
As  could  not  be  distinguish'd  but  by  names. " 

C.  ofE.  i.  I.  52. 

i.e.  (i)  "so  like  that  (they)  could  not  be,"  as  being  used  for  that 
(see  109) ;  or  (2)  "  the  one  so  like  the  other,"  &c.  is  loosely  used  for 
"  the  two  so  like  each  other  as  could  not  be  distinguished." 

Similarly  as  is  used  as  a  relative  after  an  antecedent  implied,  but 
not  expressed,  by  so  with  an  adjective  : 

"  I  cannot  but  be  sad,  so  heavy-sad 

As  .  .  .  makes  me  faint." — Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  31. 
i.e.  "  I  feel  such  sadness  as." 

281  So  (as).  Under  the  Relative  we  have  seen  that  sometimes 
the  antecedent,  sometimes  the  relative,  is  omitted,  without  injury  to 
the  sense.  Similarly  in  relatival  constructions,  e.g.  so  .  .  .  as, 
so  .  .  .  that,  &c.  one  of  the  two  can  be  omitted. 

The  as  is  sometimes  omitted  : 

"  I  wonder  he  is  so  fond 
(as)  To  trust  the  mockery  of  unjust  slumbers." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  3.  26. 
"So  fond  [i.e.  foolish]  (as)  to  come  abroad." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  3.  10. 
"  No  woman's  heart 
So  big  (as)  to  hold  so  much." — T.  AT.  ii.  4.  99. 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.  193 

"  Sliall  I  so  much  dishonour  my  fair  stars 
(as)  On  equal  terms  to  give  him  chastisement  ?  " 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  21. 

R.  and  J.  ii.  3.  91  ;  Macbeth,  ii.  3.  55  ;  Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  12. 
As  or  who  is  omitted  in  : 

"  And  while  it  is  so,  none  so  dry  or  thirsty 

Will  deign  to  sip  or  touch  one  drop  of  it." — T.  ofSh.  v.  2. 144. 
i.e.  "None  is  so  thirsty  (who)  will  deign"  where  we  should  say  "as 
to  deign."     Less  probably,  "none  (be  he  how)  so  (ever)  dry." 
So  and  as  are  both  omitted  in  :     . 

"Be  not  (so)  fond 
(As)  To  think  that  Caesar  bears  such  rebel  blood.  "-J.  C.  iii.  I.  40. 

282.  So  (that)-     The  that  is  sometimes  omitted 

"  I  am  so  much  a  fool  (that)  it  would  be  my  disgrace." 

Macb.  iv.  2.  27. 

283.  (So)  that.     So  before  that  is  very  frequently  omitted  : 
"Ross.   The  victory  fell  onus.     Dune.   Great  happiness! 

Ross.  (So)  that  now  Sueno,  the  Norway's  king,  craves  composi- 
tion. "—Macbeth,  i.  2.  59. 

Compare  Macb.  i.  7.  8,  ii.  2.  7,  ii.  2.  24  ;  J.  C.  i.  i.  50. 

In  all  these  omissions  the  missing  word  can  be  so  easily  supplied 
from  its  correspondent  that  the  desire  of  brevity  is  a  sufficient 
explanation  of  the  omission. 

"A  sheet  of  paper 

Writ  o'  both  sides  the  leaf,  margent  and  all, 
That  he  was  fain  to  seal  on  Cupid's  name." — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  9. 

284.  That,  for  becaitse,  when.      Since  that  represents  different 
cases  of  the  relative,  it  may  mean  "  in  that,"  "  for  that,"  "  because  " 
("  quod"),  "  or  at  which  time  "  ("  quum  "). 

In ,  or  for  that : 

"  Unsafe  the  while  that  we  must  lave  our  honours,"  &c. 

Macbeth,  iii.  2.  32. 

"  O,  spirit  of  love  !    How  quick  and  fresh  art  thou 
That  (in  that),  .  .  .  nought  enters  there  but,".&c. 

T.  N.  i.  I.  10. 
"  Like  silly  beggars 

Who  sitting  in  the  stocks  refuge  their  shame, 
That  (because)  many  have  and  others  must  sit  there, 
And  in  this  thought  they  find  a  kind  of  ease." 

Rich.  II.  v.  5.  27. 


194  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

At  which  time  ;  when  : 

"In  the  day  Mo/thon  eatest  thereof." — Gen.  ii.  17. 
"-Now  it  is  the  time  of  night 
That  the  graves  all  gaping  wide, 
Every  one  lets  forth  his  sprite." — M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  387. 
"  So  wept  Duessa  until  eventyde, 
That  shynyng  lamps  in  Jove's  high  course  were  lit." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  L  5.  19. 
"Is  not  this  the  day 
That  Hermia  should  give  answer  of  her  choice  ?  " 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  I.  133. 
"So>  till  the  judgment  that  yourself  arise, 
You  live  in  this  and  dwell  in  lovers'  eyes." — Sonn.  55. 

Compare  "  Then  that,"  apparently  "then  •when.'11     (2  Hen.  IV.  iv. 
i.  117.) 

These  uses  of  that  are  now  superseded  by  the  old  interrogatives 
-why  and  when,  just  as,  even  in  Shakespeare's  time,  many  of  the  uses 
of  that  had  been  transferred  to  the  interrogatives  who  and  which. 

"  Albeit  I  will  confess  thy  father's  wealth 
Was  the  first  motive  that  I  wooed  thee,  Anne." 

M.  W.ofW.  iii.  4.  H. 

i.e.  "for  which,  or  why,  I  wooed  thee." 

The  use  of  that  for  when  is  still  not  uncommon,  especially  in  the 
phrase  "  now  that  I  know,"  &c.     It  is  omitted  after  "now"  in 
"But  now  (that)  I  am  return'd,  and  that  war  thoughts 
Have  left  their  places  vacant,  in  their  rooms 
Come  thronging  soft  and  delicate  desires." — M.  Ado,  i.  I.  303. 
So  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  170 ;  M.  N.  D.  iv.  I.  67,  109. 
That  =  "in  which"  in 

"Sweet  Hero,  now  thy  image  doth  appear 
In  the  sweet  semblance  that  I  loved  it  first." — M.  Ado,  v.  i.  260. 

285.  That  omitted  and  then  inserted.  The  purely  conjunctional 
use  of  that  is  illustrated  by  the  Elizabethan  habit  of  omitting  it  at  the 
beginning  of  a  sentence,  where  the  construction  is  obvious,  and  then 
inserting  it  to  connect  a  more  distant  clause  with  the  conjunction  on 
which  the  clause  depends.  In  most  cases  the  subjects  of  the  clauses 
are  different 

"  Though  my  soul  be  guilty  and  that  I  think,"  &c. 

B.  J.  Cy's  Rtv.  iii.  2. 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.  195 

"Were  it  not  thy  sour  leisure  gave  sweet  leave, 
And  that  thou  teachest." — Sonn.  39. 

"If  this  law 

Of  nature  be  corrupted  through  affection, 
And  that  great  minds,  of  partial  indulgence 
To  their  benumbed  wills,  resist  the  same." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  179. 

This  may  explain  (without  reference  to  "but  that,"  122)  : 

"  If  frosts  and  fasts,  hard  lodging  and  thin  weeds 
Nip  not  the  gaudy  blossoms  of  your  love, 
But  that  it  bear  this  trial."— Z.  L.  Z.  v.  2.  813. 

For  "if  that"  see  287. 

"  Think  I  am  dead,  and  that  even  here  thou  takest, 
As  from  my  death-bed,  my  last  living  leave." 

Rick.  II.  v.  i.  38. 

So  T.  N.  v.  i.  126;   W.  T.  L  3.  84 ;  A.  and  C.  iii.  4.  31 ;  P. 
of  T.  i.  Gower,  11. 

"  I  love  and  hate  her,  for  she's  fair  and  royal, 
And  that  she  hath  all  woxthy  parts  more  exquisite." 

Cytnb.  iii.  5.  71. 
i.  e.  '  'for  that "  or  "  because. " 

"She  says  I  am  not  fair,  that  I  lack  manners  ; 
She  calls  me  proud,  and  that  she  could  not  love  me. " 

A.   Y.  L.  iv.  2.  16. 

In  the  above  example  the  that  depends  upon  a  verb  of  speech 
implied  in  "calls."    This  construction  is  still  more  remarkable  in — 

"  But  here's  a  villain  that  would  face  me  down 

He  met  me  on  the  mart,  and  that  I  beat  him."— C.  of  E.  iii.  I.  7. 
Compare  the  French  use  of  "que"  instead  of  repeating  "si," 
"quand,"  &c. 

286..  Whatsoever  that.     In  the  following  there  is  probably  an 
ellipsis  : 

"  This  and  what  needful  else  (there  be) 

That  calls  upon  us." — Macbeth,  v.  8.  72. 
"  Till  whatsoever  star  (it  be)  that  guides  my  moving 

Points  on  me  graciously  with  fair  aspect." — Sonn.  26. 
"  As  if  that  whatsoever  god  (/'/  be)  who  leads  him 

Were  slily  crept  into  his  human  powers." — Corlol.  ii.  I.  235. 

In  the  latter,  that  is  probably  the  demonstrative.     It  might,  how- 
ever, be  the  conjunctional  that.     See  "  if  that"  287. 

O   2 


,96  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

287.  That  as  a  conjunctional  affix.     Just  as  so  and  as  are  affixed 
to  who  (whoso),  when  (whenso),  -where  (whereas,  whereso),  in  order 
to  give  a  relative  meaning  to  words  that  were  originally  interrogative, 
in  the  same  way  that  was  frequently  affixed.* 
"  When  that  the  poor  have  cried." 

J.  C.  Hi.  2.  96  ;  T.  N.  v.  I.  398. 
"  Why  that."— Hen.  V.  v.  2.  34. 
' '  You  may  imagine  him  upon  Blackheath, 
Where  that  his  lords  desire  him  to  have  borne 
His  bruised  helmet  and  his  bended  sword 
Before  him  through  the  city."— Hen.  V.  v.  Prologue,  17. 
So  A.   Y.  L.  ii.  7.  75  ;  iv.  3.  117.     This,  with  the  above,  explains 
"  Edmund.    When  by  no  means  he  could. 
Gloucester.   Pursue  him,  ho  !  go  after.     By  no  means  what  ? 
Edmund.   Persuade  me  to  the  murder  of  your  lordship, 
But  that  I  told  him,"  &c. — Lear,  ii.  I.  47. 

Gradually,  as  the  interrogatives  were  recognized  as  relatives,  the 
force  of  that,  so,  as,  in  "when  that,"  "when.r0,"  "when  as," 
seems  to  have  tended  to  make  the  relative  more  general  and  in- 
definite;  "who  so"  being  now  nearly  (and  once  quite)  as  indefi- 
nite as  "whosoever."  The  "  ever"  was  added  when  the  "  so  "  had 
begun  to  lose  its  force.  In  this  sense,  by  analogy,  that  was  attached 
to  other  words,  such  as  "if,"  "though,"  "why,"  &c. 
"  If  that  the  youth  of  my  new  interest  here 

Have  power  to  bid  you  welcome. " — M.  of  V.  Hi.  2.  224. 
-Compare 

"  If  that  rebellion 
Came  like  itself,  in  base  and  abject  routs." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  32  ;   T.  N.  i.  5.  324,  v.  I.  375. 
So  Lear,  v.  3.  262  ;   Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  7. 

The  fuller  form  is  found,  CHAUC.  Pard.  Tale,  375  :  "  If  so  were 
that  I  might;"  and  Lodge  writes,  "If  so  I  mourn."   Similarly,  "If 
so  be  thou  darest." — Coriol.  v.  14.  98. 
Compare : 

"  While  that."— Hen.   V.  v.  2.  46. 
"  Though  that." 

Coriol.  i.  I.  144  ;  Lear,  iv.  6.  219  ;   T.  N.  i.  3.  48. 
"  Lest  that."— Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  142;  T.  N.  Hi.  4.  384. 
"  Whether  that."— \  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  28. 

*  St.  Mark  iii.  35.   Where  our  Version  has  "  "Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my 
Father,"  Wickliffe  has  "Who  that  doth." 


RELATIVAL  CONSTRUCTIONS.  197 

"  So  as  that"  frequently  found. 

"Since  that."—Macb.  iv.  3.  106;  Rich.  III.  v.  3.  202. 
that"  is  also  frequent.   We  also  find  that  frequently  affixed  to 
prepositions  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  a  conjunctival  meaning  : 
" For  that"  (Macb.  iv.  3.  185);   "in  that;"  "afterthat,"&.c. 
The  Folio  has 

"  Your  vertue  is  my  priuiledge  :  for  that 
It  is  not  night  when  I  doe  see  your  face. 
Therefore  I  thinke  I  am  not  in  the  night." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  220. 

The  Globe  omits  the  full  stop  after  "face,"  making  "for  that" 
(because)  answer  to  "therefore."  Others  remove  the  stop  after 
"  privilege  "  and  place  it  after  "  for  that." 

Hence  we  find  "  but  that"  where  we  should  certainly  omit  that 
"The  breath  no  sooner  left  his  father's  body 
But  that  his  wildness,  mortified  in  him, 
Seem'd  to  die  too."— Hen.  V.\.  I.  26. 

288.  That,  origin  Of.  Is  that,  when  used  as  above,  demonstrative 
or  relative  ?  The  passage  quoted  above  from  Chaucer,*  "7/"so  were 
that"  renders  it  probable  that  a  similar  ellipsis  must  be  supplied 
with  the  other  conjunctions  :  "  Though  (it  be)  that"  '•'•Since  (it  is) 
that"  £c.  With  prepositions  the  case  is  different,  e.g.  "for  that" 
1 '  in  that, "  "  after  that. "  For  this  use  of  that  can  be  traced  to  A.  -S. , 
where  we  find  "for  \>am  \>e"  i.e.  "for  this  purpose  that,"  "after 
\>am  be,"  &c.  Here  "bam"  is  more  emphatic  than  ")>e,"  and 
evidently  gave  rise  to  the  English  that.  But  "bam  "  was  the  A.-S. 
demonstrative.  It  follows  that  the  that  is  (by  derivative  use,  at  all 
events)  demonstrative  in  "for  that"  or,  perhaps  we  should  say, 
stands  as  an  abridgment  for  "  that  (demonst.)  that  (rel.)."  In  fact, 
we  can  trace  the  A.-S.  "after  \>am  be"  to  the  E.  E.  "after  that 
that,"  and  so  to  the  later  "after  that."  Hence  we  must  explain 

"The  rather 
For  that  I  saw  the  tyrant's  power  afoot." — Macb.  iv.  3.  185. 

as  "for  that  (that),  i.e.  for  that,  because,  I  saw."  It  would  be  wrong, 
however,  to  say  that  that  in  "  since  thai"  is,  by  derivative  use,  demon- 
strative. On  the  contrary,  "since  "in  itself  (sib-ban)  contains  the 
demonstrative,  and  "  since  that"  corresponds  to  "  sib-ban  \>at"  where 
that-  (bat)  is  relative.  And  similarly  "though  that"  corresponds  to 
the  A.-S.  "beah  be,"  where  that  (be)  is  the  relative.  The  that  in 
*  Compare  "If  so  be  that." 


198  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"after  that"  "  before  that"  invites  comparison  with  the  "  quam  " 
in  "  postquam "  and  "antequam,"  though  in  the  Latin  it  is  the 
antecedent,  not  the  relative,  that  is  suppressed.  The  tendency  of 
the  relative  to  assume  a  conjunctional  meaning  is  illustrated  by  th*e 
post -classical  phrase,  "dico  quod  (or  quia]  verum  est,"  in  the  place 
of  the  classical  "dico  id  verum  esse."  Many  of  the  above  Eliza- 
bethan phrases,  which  are  now  disused,  may  be  illustrated  from 
French:  "Since  that"  "  puisque ; "  "though  that,"  "  quoi  que;" 
"before  that"  "avant  que,"  &c.  Instead  of  "for  that"  we  find  in 
French  the  full  form,  "par  ce  que,"  i.e.  "by  /^/(dem.)  that  (re\.)." 
It  is  probable  that  Chaucer  and  Mandeville,  if  not  earlier  writers, 
were  influenced  in  their  use  of  the  conjunctional  that  by  French 
usage.  Even  in  the  phrase  "I  say  that  it  is  true,"  that  may  be  ex- 
plained as  having  a  relatival  force  (like  5n,  "  quod,"  and  the  French 
"  que  "),  meaning,  "I  say  in  what  way,  how  that,  it  is  true."  In  the 
phrase,  "1  come  that  (in  the  way  in  which;  *ut,'  ws,  '  afin  que') 
I  may  see,"  the  relatival  force  of  that  is  still  more  evident. 

289.  As  is  used  in  the  same  way  as  a  conjunctional  affix.  Thus 
' '  ^vhile  as : " 

"  Pirates  .  .  .  still  revelling  like  lords  till  all  be  gone 
While  as  the  silly  owner  of  the  goods 
Weeps  over  them." — 2  Hen  VI.  i.  I.  225. 

"  When  as:" 

"  When  as  the  enemy  hath  been  ten  to  one." — 3  Hen  VI.  i.  2.  75. 
"  When  as  the  noble  Duke  of  York  was  slain." — Ib.  ii.  l.  46. 
So  Ib.  v.  7.  34. 

"  Where  as  "  is  used  by  us  metaphorically.     But  Shakespeare  has 

"  Unto  St.  Alban's, 
Where  as  the  king  and  queen  do  mean  to  hawk." 

2  Hen  VI.  i.  2.  57. 

"They  back  retourned  to  the  princely  Place, 
Whereas  an  errant  knight  .  .  .  they  new  arrived  find." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  4.  38. 

So  "  there  as"  is  used  in  earlier  English.  "  There  that"  is  also 
found  in  Chaucer  in  a  local  sense. 

Of  course  the  "  so  "  in  "  whenr0,"  "  wherejtf  "  &c.,  is  nearly  the 
same  in  meaning,  just  as  it  is  the  same  in  derivation,  with  the  as 
in  "wheruw,"  &c. 


VERBS,  FORMS  OF.  199 

VERBS,  FORMS  OF. 

290.  Verbs,  Transitive  (formation  of).  The  termination  en 
(the  infinitive  inflection)  is  sufficient  to  change  an  English  monosyl- 
labic noun  or  adjective  into  a  verb.  Thus  "heart"  becomes  "hearts;" 
"light,"  "lights/*;"  "glad,"  "gladd^w,"  &c.  The  licence  with 
which  adjectives  could  be  converted  into  verbs  is  illustrated  by 

"  Eche  that  enhauncith  hym  schal  be  lowid,  and  he  that  mekith 
hymself  shall  be  highid." — WICKLIFFE,  St.  Lttke  xiv.  II. 

In  the  general  destruction  of  inflections  which  prevailed  during 
the  Elizabethan  period,  en  was  particularly  discarded.  It  was 
therefore  dropped  in  the  conversion  of  nouns  and  adjectives  into 
verbs,  except  in  some  cases  where  it  was  peculiarly  necessary  to 
distinguish  a  noun  or  adjective  from  a  verb.  (So  strong  was  the 
discarding  tendency  that  even  the  e  in  "owen,"  "to  possess,"  was 
dropped,  and  Shakespeare  continually  uses  "owe"  for  "owen" 
or  "own"*  (T.  N.  i.  5.  329;  Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  185).  The«  has  now 
been  restored.)  But  though  the  infinitive  inflection  was  generally 
dropped,  the  converting  power  was  retained,  undiminished  by  the 
absence  of  the  condition.  Hence  it  may  be  said  that  any  noun 
or  adjective  could  be  converted  into  a  verb  by  the  Elizabethan 
authors,  generally  in  an  active  signification,  as — 

"  Which  happies  (makes  happy)  those  that  pay  the  willing  lover." 

Sonn.  II. 

"Time  will  unfair  (deface)  that  (which)  fairly  doth  excel."—  Ib.  5. 
So: 

Balntd  (healed). — Lear,  iii.  6.  105. 
Barn. — "Barns  a  harvest." — R.  of  L. 
Bench  (sit).—  Lear,  iii.  6.  40. 

Bold  (embolden).  —  "  Not  bolds  the  king."— Lear,  v.  i.  26. 
Brain.  "  Such  stuff  as  madmen 

Tongue  and  brain  not." — Cymb.  v.  4.  147. 
i.e.  "such  stuff  as  madmen  use  their  tongues  in,  but  not  their 

brains." 
Child.  —  "  Childing  autumn."—^/.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  112:  i.e.    "autumn 

producing  fruits  as  it  were  children. " 

Climate.—"  Climates  (neut.)  [lives]  here."—  W.  T.  v.  i.  170. 
Cowarded. — "  That  hath  so  c0wardedxn&  chased  your  blood. "—//«/. 
V.  ii.  2.  75. 

*  Compare  "  The  gates  are  ope"  Coriol.  i.  4.  48. 


200  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Coy  (to be  coy).— "Nay,  if  he  coy' d."— Coriol.  v.  I.  6. 

Disaster  (make  disastrous-looking).—"  The  holes  where  eyes  should 

be  which  pitifully  disaster  the  cheeks."— A.  and  C.  ii.  7.  18. 
False.— "  Has  falsed  his  faith."— SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  19.  46. 
Fame.  —  "  Fames  his  wit."— Sonn.  84. 
Fault.—41  Cannot  fault  (neut.)  twice."— N.  P.  Pref.;  B.  ].Alch.\a..  i. 

Feeble  — "  And  feetting  such  as  stand  not  in  their  liking." 

Coriol.  i.  i.  199. 

Fever  (give  a  fever  to).  —  "  The  white  hand  of  a  lady  fever  thee, 
Shake  thou  to  look  on't."— A.  and  C.  lii.  13.  138. 

Fond.  "  My  master  loves  her  truly, 

And  I,  poor  monster,  fond  as  much  on  him." — T.  N.  ii.  2.  35. 

Fool  (stultify).  "  Why,  that's  the  way 

To  fool  their  preparations." — A.  and  C.  v.  2.  225. 

This  explains 

"Why  old  men  yW  and  children  calculate. "  —J.  C.  i.  3.  65. 
Foot. — "Foots"  (kicks).  —  Cymb.  iii.  5.  148.     On  the  other  hand,  in 
"A  power  already  footed  "  (Lear,  iii.  2.  14),  it  means  "set  on 
foot  ;"  and   ia  "  the  traitors  late  footed  in  the  kingdom"  (Ib. 
in.  7.  45),  it  means  "that  have  obtained  a  footing." 
Force  (to  urge  forcibly). — "Why  force  you  this?" — Coriol.  iii.  2.  51. 
Also  (to  attach  force  to,  regard)  : 

"  But  ah  !  who  ever  shunn'd  by  precedent 
The  destin'd  ills  she  must  herself  assay, 
Or  forced  examples  'gainst  her  own  content, 
To  put  the  by-past  perils  in  her  way  ?" — L.  C.  157. 

i.e.  "whoever  regarded  examples."     So  L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  441. 
Furnace. — "  Furnaces  sighs. " — Cymb.i.  6.  66. 
Gentle.—"  This  day  shall  gentle  his  condition."— /&».  V.  iv.  3.  63. 
God.— "He^Wtffl/me."—  Coriol.  v.  3.  11. 

Honest. — " Honests  (honours)  a  lodging." — B.  J.  Si/.  Worn.  i.  I. 
Inherit  (make  an  inheritor).  "  That  can  inherit  us 

So  much  as  of  a  thought  of  ill  in  him." — Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  85. 
Knee  (kneel). — "  Knee  the  way." — Coriol.  v.  I.  5. 
Lesson  (teach).—  ''Lesson  me."—  T.  G.  ofV.\\.  7.  5;  Rich.  III.  i.  4.  246. 
Linger  (make  to  linger).  < «  Life 

Which  false  hope  lingers  in  extremity." 

"  Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  72  j  M.  N.  D.  i.  I.  4. 


VERBS>  FORMS  OF.  201 

Mad.— "  Mads"  (makes  angry).—  Rich.  II.  v.  5.  61. 

Mellow  (ripen,  trans.). — T.  N.  i.  3.  43. 

Mist  (cover  with  mist).  —  "  If  that  her  breath  will  mist  or  stain  the 

stone." — Lear,  v.  3.  262. 
Malice. — "  Malices"  (bears  malice  to). — N.  P. 

Pale  (make  pale). — "And  'gins  to  pale  his  uneffectual  fire." 

Hamlet,  L  5.  90. 

Panging  (paining).  "  'Tis  a  sufferance  panging 

As  soul  and  body's  severing." — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  3.  15. 

/':///  (walk).  — "  For  if  thou  path  (neuter),   thy  native   semblance 
on."— J.  C.  ii.  I.  83. 

Plain  (make  plain). — "  What's. dumb  in  show  V\\  plain  in  speech." 

P.  of  T.  UL  Gower,  14. 

Property  (treat  as  a  tool). — "They  have  here  propertied  me." 

T.  N.\v.  2.  100;  K.  J.  v.  2.79. 

Rag*d  (enraged). — There  is  no   corruption  (though  the  passage  is 
marked  as  corrupt  in  the  Globe)  in 

"For  young  colts  being  rag'd  do  rage  the  mope." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  70. 

Safe. — "  And  that  which  most  with  you  should  safe  my  going, 
Fulvia  is  dead." — A.  and  C.  i.  3,  55. 

i.e.  "make  my  departure  unsuspected  by  you  of  dangerous  con- 
sequences. " 

Scale  (weigh,  put  in  the  scale). — "Scaling  his  present  bearing  with 
his  past."—  Coriol.  ii.  3.  257. 

Stage  (exhibit). — "  I  do  not  like  to  stage  me  to  their  eyes." 

M.forM.  i.  I.  69. 
Stock  (put  in  the  stocks). — "  Stocking  his  messenger." 

Lear,  ii.  2.  139. 

Stream  (unfurl). — "  Streaming  the  ensign."—  Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  94. 
Toil  (give  labour  to). — Probably  in 

"  Why  this  same  toil  and  most  observant  watch 
So  nightly  toils  the  subject  of  the  land." — Hamlet,  i.  I.  72. 

So  "toil'd,"  passive. — Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  96. 
Tongue. — "  How  might  she  tongue  me?" — M.  for  M.  iv.  4.  28. 
i.t:  "  speak  of,  or  accuse,  me."     "  Tongue"  means  "  speak  :>  in 

"  Such  stuff  as  madmen 
Tongue,  and  brain  not." — Cymb.  v.  4.  147. 


202  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Trifle.—"  Trifles  (renders  trifling)  former  knowing."—  Macb.  ii.  4-  4. 
Undeaf.—"  My  death's  sad  tale  may  yet  undeaf  his  ear." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  6. 

Verse  (expressing  in  verse).—"  Versing  love.  "—  M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  67. 

Violent  (act  violently).  —  "And  violenteth  in  a  sense  as  strong." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  4.  4. 

Wage  (pay  :  so  E.  E.).—  "  He  waged™."—  Coriol.  v.  6.  40. 
Womb  (enclose).  —  "The  close  earth  wombs  or  the  profound  sea  hides.  " 

IV.  T.  iv.  4.  501. 
Worthied  (ennobled).—  "That  worthied  him."—  Lear,  ii.  2.  128. 

The  dropping  of  the  prefix  be  was  also  a  common  licence.     We 
have  recurred  to  "Switch"  and  "Mate,"  but  Shakespeare  wrote  — 

"  And  -witch  the  world  with  noble  horsemanship." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  110. 
"Now  spurs  the  lated  traveller  apace.  "  —  Macbeth,  iii.  3.  6. 

"  Disorder,  that  hath  spoil'd  us,  friend  us  now." 

Hen.   V.  iv.  5.  17. 

291.  Sometimes  an  intransitive  verb  is  converted  into 
a  transitive  verb. 

Cease.  —  "  Heaven  cease  this  idle  humour  in  your  honour  !  " 

T.  ofSh.  Ind.  2.  13.     So  Cymb.  v.  5.  255. 
Expire.  —  Time  "expires  a  term."  —  R.  and  J.  \.  4.  109. 
Fall.  —  An  executioner  "falls  an  axe."  —  A.   Y.  L.  iii.  5,  and  pro- 

bably (though  fall  may  be  the  subjunctive)  in 
"Think  on  me,  and/«//  thy  edgeless  axe."—  Rich.  III.  v.  3.  135. 
Peer.  —  "Peers  (causes  to  peer)  his  chin."  —  R.  of  L. 

Perish.  —  "Thy  flinty  heart  .  .  .  might  perish  (destroy)  Margaret." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  100. 

Quail  (make  to  quail).  —  "But  when  he  meant  to  quail  and  shake 
the  orb."  —  A.  and  C.  v.  L.  85. 

Relish.  —  "Relishes  (makes  acceptable)  his  nimble  notes  to  pleasing 
ears."—  R.  of  L. 

Remember  (remind  :  so  Fr.).  —  "Every  stride  I  take 

Will  but  remember  me  what,"  &c.  —  Rich.  II.  i.  3.  269. 
Retire  (so  Fr.).  —  "  That  he  might  have  retired  his  power  " 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  46. 


Shine.  —  "Goddoth  not  shine  honour  upon  all  men  equally."  —  6. 
Squint.  —  "  Squints  the  eye  and  makes  the  harelip."  —  Lear,i\i.  4.122. 
i.e.  "makes  the  eye  squint." 


VERBS,  FORMS  OF.  203 

Fear.  This  word  is  not  in  point.  It  had  the  signification  of 
"frighten  "  in  A.-S.  and  E.  E.  Hence, 

"  Thou  seest  what's  past  :  go/ear  thv  king  withal." 

'  3  Hen.  VL  iii.  3.  226. 

"  This  aspect  of  mine  hath  fear'd  the  valiant." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  i.  9. 
So  in  Spenser,  "  Words  fearen  babes." 

The  same  remark  applies  to  "learn,"  which  meant  "teach." 

"  The  red  plague  rid  you 
For  learning  me  your  language. " — Tempest,  i.  2.  365. 

292.  The  licence  in  the  formation  of  verbs  arose  partly 

from  the  unfixed  nature  of  the  language,  partly  from  the  desire  of 
brevity  and  force.  Had  it  continued,  it  would  have  added  many 
useful  and  expressive  words  to  the  language.  In  vigorous  colloquy 
we  still  occasionally  use  such  expressions  as — 

"Grace  me  no  grace,  nor  uncle  me  no  uncles." — Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  87. 

"  Thank  me  no  thankiugs,  nor  proud  me  no  prouds." 

R.  and  J.  iii.  5.  153. 

As  it  is,  we  can  occasionally  use  the  termination  -fy,  as  in 
"stultify,"  and  sometimes  the  suffix  -en  or  the  prefix  be-.  But  for 
the  most  part  we  are  driven  to  a  periphrasis. 

293.  Transitive  verbs  are  rarely  used  intransitively. 

Eye  (appear).  "But,  sir,  forgive  me 

Since  my  becomings  kill  me,  when  they  do  not 
Eye  well  to  you." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  97. 

Lack  (to  be  needed). — "  And  what  so  poor  a  man  as  Hamlet  is 
May  do  to  express  his  love  and  friending  to  you, 
God  willing,  shall  not  lack." — Hamlet,  i.  5.  186.     So  E.  E. 

Need  (to  be  needed). — "These  ceremonies  need  not." 

B.  J.  E.  in  6°r.  iii.  2. 

This  is  perhaps  a  remnant  of  the  ancient  love  for  impersonal 
verbs.  Such  verbs  would  be  appropriate  to  express  "need."  Hence 
in  Matt.  xix.  20,  Mark  x.  21,  Wickliffe  has  "faileth  to  me"  and  "to 
thee,"  where  the  A.  V.  has  "what  do  I  lack  "  and  "  thou  lackest." 
Similarly,  Milton  (Areopagitica)  uses  "what  "wants  there?"  for 
"what  is  needed?"  and  this  use  still  exists  in  conversation.  So 
often  Shakespeare,  e.g. 

"There  wanteth  now  our  brother  Gloucester  here." 

Rich.  ///.  ii.  i.  43. 


204  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Show  (like  our  "  look  :  "  compare  German  "  schauen  "). 
"  Each  substance  of  a  grief  hath  twenty  shadows 
Which  shows  like  grief  itself."— Rich.  II.  \\.  2.  15. 

294.  Verbs   Passive   (formation  of).     Hence  arose   a   curious 
use    of    passive    verbs,    mostly   found    in    the    participle.      Thus 
" famous 'al  for  fights"  (Sonn.  25)  means  "  made  famous  ;"  but  in 
"Who,  young  and  simple,  would  not  be  so  lover 'd?" — L.  C. 
lover* d means  "gifted  with  a  lover."     And  this  is  the  general  rule. 
A  participle  formed  from  an  adjective  means  "  made  (the  adjective)," 
and  derived  from  a  noun  means  "endowed  with  (the  noun)."     On 
the  other  hand,  stranger }d  below  means,  not  "  gifted  with  a  stranger," 
but  "made  a  stranger."     This  use  will  be  best  illustrated  by  the 
following  examples  : — 

Childed  (provided  with  children).—"  He  childed  as  If  other*  d." 

Lear,  iii.  6.  117. 

/a*MV  (believed).— "Make  thy  words  faitNd."—Ib.  ii.  I.  72. 
Father  d  (provided  with  a  father).     See  above,  Lear,  iii.  6.  117. 
Feebhd  (enfeebled).—  K.  J.  v.  2.  146. 
Fielded  (encamped  in  the  field). — "  Our  fielded  friends." 

Coriol.  \.  4.  12. 
Gra-Jd  (entomb'd). — "  Graved  in  the  hollow  ground." 

Rich.  IL  iii.  2.  140. 
Gutted  (deceitful).— "A  guiled  shore.  "-M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  97. 

Compare:  " Beguiled  (i.e.  made  plausible) 

With  outward  honesty,  but  yet  defiled 
With  inward  vice."— R.  of  L. 

Inhabited  (made  to  inhabit).  —  "  O,  knowledge  ill-inhabited,  worse 
than  Jove  in  a  thatch'd  house." — A.   Y.  L.  iii.  3.  10. 

(  ruled).— " King'd  ot  our  fears,  until  our  fears,  resolv'd, 
Be  by  some  certain  king  purged  and  deposed."— A".  J.  ii.  I.  371. 
i.e.  "  ruled  by  our  fears." 

Lootfd  (looking).— "Lean-/<w£V  prophets.  "—Rich.  IL  ii.  4.  11. 
Lorded  (made  a  lord).—"  He  being  thus  lorded."—  Tempest,  i.  2.  97. 

Contrast  this  with  "  king'd  "  above,  which  means  not   "made  a 
king,"  but  "  ruled  as  by  a  king." 

Altered.  "  When  half  to  half  the  world  opposed, 

He  being  the  meered  question."— ^4.  and  C.  iii.  13.  10. 


VERBS,  FORMS  OF.  205 

The  word  "  meered  "  is  marked  as  cornipt  by  the  Globe  :  but 
perhaps  it  is  the  verb  from  the  adj.  "  meere  "  or  "  mere,"  which  in 
Elizabethan  English  means  "entire."  Hence,  "he  being  the  entire 
question,"  i.e.  "  Antony,  being  the  sole  cause  of  the  battle,  ought 
not  to  have  fled. " 

Million' d.—  "The  million' d  accidents  of  time. "— Sonn.  115 
Mouthed.  — ' '  Mouthed  graves. "— Ib.  77. 

Necessitcd.  — "  I  bade  her,  if  her  fortunes  ever  stood 
Necessited  to  help,  that  by  this  token 
I  would  relieve  her." — A.  W.  v.  3.  85. 

i.e.  "  made  necessitous. " 

Nighted  (benighted).— "  His  nighted  life."— Lear,  iv.  5.  13;  "Thy 
nighted  colour." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  68:  i.e.  "thy  night-like  colour. 

Paled.— "Paled  cheeks. "— Z.  C.  28. 

Pensived. — Ib.  31. 

Pined.— "His  pined  cheek." — Ib.  5, 

Practised  (plotted  against). — "The  death-practised  duke. " 

Lear,  iv.  6.  284. 
Servanted  (made  subservient). — Coriol.  v.  2.  89. 

Slow'd  (retarded). — "  I  would  I  knew  not  why  it  should  be  slowed." 

R.  andj.  iv.  I.  16. 

Stranger* d    (made   a  stranger). — "  Dower'd   with   our  curse,    and 
stranger1  d  with  our  oath." — Lear,  i.  I.  207. 

Toil'd. — "  I  have  been  so  toil'd." — B.  J.  £.  out  <SrV.  iii.  I. 
Traded.—"  Traded  pilots."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  64. 

Unlock'' d  (unlocked  for). — Rich.  III.  i.  3.  214:  compare  look  (seek). 

Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  76. 
Unsured  (unassured). — "Thy  now  unsured assurance  to  the  crown." 

K.  J.  ii.  i.  471. 
VoucJisafed  (?). — "  To  your  most  pregnant  and  -vouchsafed  ear. " 

T.  N.  iii.  i.  190. 

i.e.  capable  of  conceiving  and  graciously  bestowed. 
Window  d  (placed  in  a  window). 

"  Wouldest  thou  be  window1  din.  great  Rome." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  14.  72. 
Woman  d  (accompanied  by  a  woman). 

"  To  have  him  see  me  woman' d." — Othello,  iii.  4.  195. 
Year'd.  —  "  Year'd  but  to  thirty."— B.  J.  Sejan.  i.  I. 


to6  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

In  many  cases  a  participle  seems  preferred  where  an  adjective 
would  be  admissible,  as  "million'd."  So  in  Tempest,  v.  i.  43,  "the 
azured  vault." 

295.  Verbs  Passive.  With  some  few  intransitive  verbs,  mostly 
of  motion,  both  be  and  have  are  still  used.  "He  is  gone,"  "he 
has  gone. "  The  is  expresses  the  present  state,  the  has  the  activity 
necessary  to  cause  the  present  state.  The  is  is  evidently  quite  as 
justifiable  as  has  (perhaps  more  so),  but  it  has  been  found  more  con- 
venient to  make  a  division  of  labour,  and  assign  distinct  tasks  to 
is  and  has.  Consequently  is  has  been  almost  superseded  by  has  in 
all  but  the  passive  forms  of  transitive  verbs.  In  Shakespearian 
English,  however,  there  is  a  much  more  common  use  of  is  with 
intransitive  verbs. 

"  My  life  is  run  his  compass." — J,  C.  v.  3.  25. 

"  Whether  he  be  scaped."— 3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  2. 

"  Being  sat"— L.  C.  st.  x. 

"  Being  deep  slept  in  age." — ASCH.  189. 

"  An  enter  d  tide."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  159. 

"  I  am  arrived  for  fruitful  Lombardy." — T.  of  Sh.  i.  I.  3. 

"  Pucelle  is  entered  into  Orleans." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  5.  36  ;  Cymb.  v.  4.  120. 

"  Five  hundred  horse  .  .  .  are  marched 'up." 

2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  i.  186. 

"  The  king  himself  is  rode  to  view  their  battle." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  1. 

"  His  lordship  is  walk'd  forth." — 2  Hett.  IV.  i.  I.  3. 

"The  noble  Brutus  is  ascended."—^  C.  iii.  2.  11. 

"  You  now  are  mounted 

Where  powers  are  your  retainers.  "—Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  112. 
"  I  am  descended  Q{  a  gentler  blood."— I  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  8. 

"  Through  his  lips  do  throng 
Weak  words, so  thick  <:<?;«<? (particip. )  in  his  poor  heart's  aid. " 

R.  of  L.  1784. 
Compare  our  "welcome." 

"  How  now,  Sir  Proteus,  are  you  crept  before  us?" 

T.G.ofV.  iv.  i.  18. 
So  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  259. 

"  Prince  John  is  this  morning  secretly  stolen  away." 

M.  Ado,  iv.  2.  63. 


VERBS,  FORMS  OF.  207 

This  idiom  is  common  with  words  of  "happening  :" 

"  And  bring  us  word  .  .  .  how  everything  is  chanced." 

J.  C.  v.  4.  32;  2  Hen.  IV.  \.  I.  87. 
"  Things  since  then  befallen. " — 3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  I.  106. 
"  Of  every  one  these  happened  accidents. " — Temp.  v.  i.  249. 
"  Sad  stories  chanced 'in  the  days  of  old." — T.  A.  iii.  2.  83. 
Hence  a  participial  use  like  "  departed  "  in 

"The  treachery  of  the  tivofled hence. "-W.  T.  ii.  I.  195. 
In  some  verbs  that  are  both  transitive  and  intransitive  this  idiom 
is  natural : 

"  You  were  used  to  say. " — Coriol.  ir.  I.  3. 

Perhaps  this  is  sometimes  a  French  idiom.  Thus,  "  I  am  not 
purposed"  (MONTAIGNE,  38),  is  a  translation  of  "je  ne  suis  pas 
delibere." 

This  constant  use  of  "  be  "  with  participles  of  verbs  of  motion 
may  perhaps  explain,  by  analogy,  the  curious  use  of  "  being  "  with 
the  present  participle  in 

"  To  whom  being  going." — Cymb.  iii.  6.  63. 

As  above  mentioned,   the  tendency  to  invent  new  active  verbs 
increased  the  number  of  passive  to  the  diminution  of  neuter  verbs  : 
"Poor  knave,  thou  art  overwatched."— J.  C.  iv.  3.  241. 
"  Be  weak 'd  (i.e.  avenged)  on  him." — V.  and  A.     So,  N.  P^  194. 
"•Possess"  was  sometimes  used  for  to  "put  in  possession,"  as  in 
"Possess  us,  possess  us  "  (T.  N.  ii.  3.  149)  :  i.e.  "inform  us."    So 
M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  35.     Hence  the  play  on  the  word. 

"  Deposing  thee  before  thou  wert  possessed  (of  the  throne), 
Which  art  possessed  (with  a  spirit  of  infatuation)  to  destroy 
thyself."— Rich.  II.  ii.  I.  107-8  ;  M.  of  V.  i.  3.  65. 

We  still  say  a  man  "  is  well  read."    But  in  Macb.  i.  4.  9,  there  is — 
"  As  one  that  had  been  studied  in  his  death." 
"For  Clarence  is  well-spoken."— Rich.  III.  i.  3.  348. 
"I  am  declined  into  the  vale  of  years. " — Othello,  iiL  3.  265. 
"  How  comes  it,  Michael,  you  are  \husforgot?" 

Ib.  ii.  3.  188. 

i.e.  "you  have  forgotten  yourself." 

"  If  I  had  been  remembered." —Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  22. 
We  still  say  "well-behaved,"  but  not 

"How  have  I  been  behaved."— Othello,  iv.  2.  108. 


2o8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

It  was  perhaps  already  considered  a  vulgarity,   for  Dogberry  says 
(M.  Ado,  iv.  2.  1)  : 

"  Is  our  whole  dissembly  appear  d?  " 
and  in  a  prose  scene  (Coriol.  iv.  3.  9) — 

"  Your  favour  is  well  appeared (fol.)  by  your  tongue." 
Perhaps,  however,  appear  was  sometimes  used  as  an  active  verb. 
See  Cymb.  iv.  2.  47,  iii.  4.  148,  quoted  in  296. 

296.  Verbs  Reflexive.     The  predilection  for  transitive  verbs 
was  perhaps  one  among  other  causes  why  many  verbs  which  are 
now  used  intransitively,    were  used  by   Shakespeare   reflexively. 
Many  of  these  were  derived  from  the  French. 

"Advise you."—  T.  N.  iv.  2.  102. 

"  Where  then,  alas !  may  I  complain  myself?" — Rich.  II.  i.  2.  42. 
" Endeavour  thyself  to  sleep." — T.  N.  iv.  2.  104. 
"  I  do  repent  me." — Ib.  \.  3.  52. 
"Repose you"— Ib.  ii.  3.  161. 

"  He  .  .  .  retired  himself  ." — Rich.  II.  iv.  2.  96  ;  Coriol.  i.  3.  30, 
which  is  in  accordance  with  the  original  meaning  of  the  word. 

It  has  been  shown  above  that  "fear"  is  used  transitively  for 
"frighten."     Hence,  perhaps,  as  in  Greek  <t>oftou/j.ai, 

"I fear  me."— 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  150. 
Appear  is  perhaps  used  reflexively  in 

"  No,  no  ;  we  will  hold  it  as  a  dream  till  it  appear  itself." 

M.  Ado,  i.  2.  22. 
"  If  you  could  wear  a  mind 
Dark  as  your  fortune  is,  and  but  disguise 

That  which  to  appear  itself 'must  not  yet  be."— Cymb.  iii.  4.  148. 
i.e.  "that  which,  as  regards  showing  itself,  must  not  yet  have  any 
existence."  Though  these  passages  might  be  perhaps  explained 
without  the  reflexive  use  of  appear,  yet  this  interpretation  is  made 
more  probable  by 

"  Your  favour^  well  appeared."— Coriol.  iv.  3.  9. 

297.  Verbs  Impersonal.     An  abundance  of  Impersonal  verbs 
is  a  mark  of  an  early  stage  in  a  language,  denoting  that  a  speaker  has 
not  yet  arrived  so  far  in  development  as  to  trace  his  own  actions  and 
feelings  to  his  own  agency.     There  are  many  more  impersonal  verbs 
in  Early  English  than  in  Elizabethan,  and  many  more  in  Elizabethan 
than  in  modern  English.     Thus — 


VERBS,  FORMS  OF.  209 

"  It  yearns  me  not.  "—Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  26. 

"//  would  pity  any  living  eye."— SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  6.  43. 
Comp.  2  Maccabees  iii.  21  :  "  //  would  have  pitied  a  man." 

"It  dislikes  me."— Othello,  ii.  3.  49. 
So  "  it  likes  me,"  "  mesfems,"  "  mct/iin&s,"  &c. 

"  Which  /tfw  me. "— ^«i.  F.  iv.  3.  77. 

And  therefore  //'/•<?  is  probably  (not  merely  by  derivation,  but  con- 
sciously used  as)  impersonal  in 

"  So  like  you,  sir." — Cynib.  ii.  3.  59. 
Want'\s  probably  not  impersonal  but  intransitive,  "  is  wanting,"  in 

"  There  wants  no  diligence  in  seeking  him?"* — Cymb.iv.  2. 20. 
The  singular  verb  is  quite  Shakespearian  in 

"Though  bride  and  bridegroom  wants  (are  wanting) 
For  to  supply  the  places  at  the  table."—/:  ofSh.  iii.  2.  248. 

So  in    "  Sufficeth  my  reasons  are  bothgood  and  weighty. " — Ib.  i.  1. 252. 
"Sufficeth  I  am  come  to  keep  my  word." — Ib.  iii.  2.  108. 

the  comma  after  "suffioeth"  is  superfluous;  "that  I  am  come  to 
keep  my  word  sufficeth. " 

In  ' '  And  so  betide  to  me 

As  well  I  tender  you  and  all  of  yours," — Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  71. 

betide  may  be  used  impersonally.  But  perhaps  so  is  loosely  used 
as  a  demonstrative  for  "such  fortune,"  in  the  same  way  in  which  as 
(280)  assumes  the  force  of  a  relative.  If  betide  be  treated  as  im- 
personal, bcfal  in  "fair  befal  you  "  may  be  similarly  treated,  and  in 
that  case  "fair  "is  an  adverb.  But  see  (5).  The  supposition  that 
"betide  "  is  impersonal  and  "  fair  "  an  adverb  is  confirmed  by  "  Well 
be  (it)  with  you,  gentlemen." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  398. 

The  impersonal  needs  ^which  must  be  distinguished  from  the 
adverbial  genitive  needs)  often  drops  the  s ;  partly,  perhaps,  because 
of  the  constant  use  of  the  noun  need.  It  is  often  found  with  "  what," 
where  it  is  sometimes  hard  to  say  whether  "what"  is  an  adverb  and 
need  a  verb,  or  "what  "  an  adjective  and  need  a  noun. 

"  What  need  the  bridge  much  broader  than  the  flood  ?" 

M.  Ado,  i.  i.  318. 

either  "why  need  the  bridge  (be)  broader?"  or  "what  need  is  there 
(that)  the  bridge  (be)  broader  ?" 

See  293. 
P 


2io  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Comp.  the  old  use  of  "  thinketh  "  (seemeth) : 
"  Where  /'/  thinks  best  unto  your  royal  self."— Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  63. 
The  Folio  has  thinkst :  and  perhaps  this  is  the  true  reading,  there 
being  a  confusion  between  "it  thinks"  and  " thinkest  thou."     Com- 
pare "thinkst  thee  "  in 
"  Doth  it  not,  thinkst  thee,  stand  me  now  upon?" — Hamlet,  v.  2.  63. 

The  impersonal  and  personal  uses  of  think  were  often  confused. 
Chapman  (Walker)  has  "  methink."  S  seems  to  have  been  added 
to  assimilate  the  termination  to  that  of  "  methinks  "  in  "  methoughty" 
( W.  T.  i.  2.  154 ;  Rich.  III.  i.  4.  9). 

It  is  not  easy,  perhaps  not  possible,  to  determine  whether,  in  the 
phrase  "so  please  your  highness,"  please  is  used  impersonally  or 
not ;  for  on  the  one  hand  we  find,  "  So  please  him  come," 

(y.  C.  iii.  I.  140) ; 
and  on  the  other, 

"If  they  please."— W.  T.  ii.  3.  142. 

"  I  do  repent :  but  Heaven  hath  pleased  it  so." — Ham.  iii.  4.  173. 

VERBS,   AUXILIARY. 

298.  Be,  Beest,  &c.,  was  used  in  A.-S.  (beon)  generally  in  a 
future  sense.  Hence,  since  the  future  and  subjunctive  are  closely 
connected  in  meaning,  &  assumed  an  exclusively  subjunctive  use  ;  and 
this  was  so  common,  that  we  not  merely  find  "if  it  be"  (which 
might  represent  the  proper  inflected  subjunctive  of  be),  but  also  "  if 
thou  beest,"  where  the  indicative  is  used  subjunctively. 

"  If,  after  three  days'  space,  thou  here  beest  found." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  295. 
"  Beest  thou  sad  or  merry, 

The  violence  of  either  thee  becomes." — A.  and  C.  i.  5.  59. 
And  (Matzner,  vol.  i.  p.  367),  bee,  beest,  bee,  pi.  bee,  is  stated  by 
Wallis  to  be  the  regular  form  of  the  subjunctive.  Hence,  from  the 
mere  force  of  association,  be  is  often  used  (after  though,  if,  and  other 
words  that  often  take  the  subjunctive)  without  having  the  full  force 
of  the  subjunctive.  Indeed  any  other  verb  placed  in  the  same 
context  would  be  used  in  the  indicative.  Thus : 

"  Though  Page  be  a  secure  (careless)  fool,  and  stands  so  firmly  on 
his  wife's  frailty."—^/.   W.  of  W.  ii.  i.  242. 
"  If  Hamlet  from  himself  be  ta'en  away 
And,  when  he's  not  himself,  does -wrong  Laertes." — ffam.v. 2.245. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  211 

"  If  he  be  a  whoremonger  and  comes  before  him, 
He  were  as  good  go  a  mile  on  his  errand." — M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  38. 

299.  Be  in  questions  and  dependent  sentences. 

So,  as  a  rule,  it  will  be  found  that  be  is  used  with  some  notion  of 
doubt,  question,  thought,  &c. ;  for  instance,  (a)  in  questions,  and 
(/')  after  verbs  of  thinking. 

(a)  "  Be  my  horses  ready?" — Lear,  i.  5.  36. 

"  Be  the  players  ready?"— tfamtet,  iii.  2.  111. 
This  is  especially  frequent  in  questions  of  appeal : 
"  Where  fehis  quiddities?"— Hamlet,  v.  I.  107. 
"  Where  be  thy  brothers  Y'—Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  92. 
"  Where  be  the  bending  knees  that  flatter'd  thee? 
Where  be  the  thronging  troops  that  follow'd  thee?" 

Ib.  iv.  4.  95-6. 
And  in  questions  implying  doubt,  e.g.  "  where  can  they  be  ?" 

"  Where  be  these  bloody  thieves?"—  Othello,  \.  i.  64. 
Partly,  perhaps,  by  attraction  to  the  previous  be,  partly  owing  to 
the  preceding  where,  though  not  used  interrogatively,  we  have 

"  Truths  would  be  tales, 
Where  now  half-tales  be  truths." — A.  attd  C.  ii.  2.  137. 

(b)  "  I  think  it  be,  sir  ;  I  deny  it  not."— C.  of  E.  v.  i.  379. 

11 1  think  this  Talbot  be  a  fiend  of  hell."— i  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  46. 
"  I  think  he  be  transformed  into  a  beast." — A.   Y.  L.  ii.  7.  1. 
"  I  think  it  be  no  other  but  even  so."— Hamlet,  i.  I.  108. 
So  I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  I.  12  ;   T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  3.  6. 

Be  expresses  more  doubt  than  is  after  a  verb  of  thinking.  In  the 
following,  the  Prince  thinks  it  certain  that  it  is  past  midnight,  the 
Sheriff  thinks  it  may  possibly  be  two  o'clock  : 

"  Prince.   I  think  it  is  good  morrow,  is  it  not? 
Sheriff.   Indeed,  my  lord,  I  think  it  be  two  o'clock." 

i  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  573. 

Very  significant  is  this  difference  in  the  speech  of  the  doubtful 
Othello— 

"  I  think  my  wife  be  honest,  and  think  she  is  not," 

Othello,  iii.  3.  384. 

where  the  is  is  emphatic  and  the  line  contains  the  extra  dramatic 
syllable.     Be  is  similarly  used  by  a  jealous  husband  after  "  hope : " 

"  Ford.  Well,  I  hope  it  be  not  so."— M.  W.  of  W.  ii.  I.  113. 
where  the  hope  is  mixed  with  a  great  deal  of  doubt. 

P   2 


212  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  I  kissed  it  (the  bracelet) : 
I  hope  it  be  not  gone  to  tell  my  lord 
That  I  kiss  aught  but  he,"— Cymb.  ii.  3.  153. 
where,  though  the  latter  part  is  of  course  fanciful,  there  is  a  real 
fear  that  the  bracelet  may  be  lost. 
Also,  in  a  dependent  sentence  like  the  following  : 

"  Prove  true 
That  I,  dear  brother,  be  now  ta'en  for  you." — T.  N.  iii.  4.  410. 

Be  follows  "when,"  as  "where"  above,  especially  where  when 
alludes  to  a  future  possibility. 

"  Haply  a  woman's  voice  may  do  some  good 

When  articles  too  nicely  urged  be  stood  on." — Hen.  F.v.2.93. 
In     "  Alas,  our  frailty  is  the  cause,  not  we, 

For  such  as  we  are  made,  of  such  we  be" — T.  N.  ii.  2.  33. 

it  can  scarcely  be  asserted  that  "for"  is  "for  that"  or  "because." 
It  is  more  probable  that  the  scene  originally  ended  there,  and  that 
Shakespeare  used  be  in  order  to  get  the  rhyme,  which  so  often  termi- 
nates a  scene. 

300.  Be  is  much  more  common  with  the  plural  than  the  singular. 
Probably  only  this  fact,  and  euphony,  can  account  for 

"  When  blood  is  nipp'd  and  ways  be  foul."— Z.  L.  L.  v.  2.  926. 

In  "When  he  sees  reason  of  fears,  as  we  do,  his  fears  out  of 
doubt  be  of  the  same  relish  as  ours," — Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  113. 

the  be  may  partly  be  explained  as  not  stating  an  independent  fact, 
but  a  future  event,  dependent  on  the  clause  "  when,"  &c.  Partly, 
perhaps,  "out  of  doubt"  is  treated  like  "there  is  no  doubt  that," 
and  be  follows  in  a  kind  of  dependent  clause. 

Be  is  also  used  to  refer  to  a  number  of  persons,  considered  not 
individually,  but  as  a  kind  or  class. 

"O,  there  be  players  that  I  have  seen  play,  and  heard  others 
praise,  and  that  highly,  that,"  &c.—  Hamlet,  iii.  2.  32 ;  ib.  44. 
"  There  be  some  sports  are  painful." — Tempest,  iii.  I.  1. 
But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  desire  of  euphony  or  variety 
seems  sometimes  the  only  reason  for  the  use  of  be  or  are. 

"  Where  is  thy  husband  now  ?     Where  be  thy  brothers  ? 
Where  are  thy  children  ?  "—Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  92. 

301.  Were.     What  has  been  said  above  of  be  applies  to  -were, 
that  it  is  often  used  as  the  subjunctive  where  any  other  verb  would 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  213 

not  be  so  used,  and  indeed  where  the  subjunctive  is  unnecessary 
or  wrong,  after  "if,"  "though,"  &c.,  and  in  dependent  sentences. 

In  early  authors  there  seems  to  have  been  a  tendency  to  use 
should  for  shall,  and  were  for  be  after  "that"  in  subordinate  sen- 
tences :  "  Go  we  fast  that  we  were  there."  "  Let  us  pray  that  he 
wottld."  "  My  will  is  that  it  were  so."  In  these  sentences  a  wish 
is  implied,  and  were,  perhaps,  indicates  the  desire  that  the  wish 
should  be  fulfilled,  not  hereafter,  but  at  once,  as  a  thing  of  the  past. 

"  I  am  a  rogue,  if  I  were  not  at  half-sword  with  a  dozen  of  them 
two  hours  together." — I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  182. 

"If  there  were  anything  in  thy  pocket  but  tavern  reckonings, 
I  am  a  villain." — I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  3.  180. 

"  What  if  we  do  omit 
This  reprobate  till  he  were  well  inclined  ?" — M.  for  M.  iv.  3.  78. 

In  some  of  these  passages  there  may  be  traced,  perhaps,  a  change 
of  thought  :  "  I  am  a  rogue  (that  is,  I  should  be),  if  it  were  true 
that  I  was  not,"  &c.  "  What  if  we  omit  (what  if  we  were  to  omit) 
this  reprobate  till  he  were  well  inclined?" 

"Duchess.   I  pray  thee,  pretty  York,  who  told  thee  this? 
York.   Grandam,  his  nurse. 

Duchess.   His  nurse  !  Why,  she  was  dead  ere  thou  wert  born. 
York.  If  'twere  not  she,  I  cannot  tell  who  told  me." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  34. 
"If  ever  Bassianus,  Caesar's  son, 
Were  gracious  in  the  eyes  of  royal  Rome, 
Keep  then  this  passage  to  the  Capitol." — T.  A.  i.  I.  11. 

Comp.  2  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  85  ;  A.  and  C.  i.  3.  41. 

"  No  marvel,  then,  though  he  were- ill-affected. " — Lear,  ii.  I.  100. 
\\here  the  meaning  is:  "It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  hewas  a  traitor," 
and  no  doubt  or  future  meaning  is  implied. 

Somewhat  similar  is  an  idiom  common  in  good  authors  even 
now:  "It  is  not  strange  that  he  should  have  succeeded,"  for  the 
shorter  and  simpler,  "  It  is  not  strange  that  he  succeeded." 

"Lamachus,  .  .  .  whom  they  sent  hither,  though  he  -were  waxe» 
now  somewhat  old." — N.  P.  172. 

So,  but  with  a  notion  of  concession, 

"And  though  (granting  that)  he  were  unsatisfied  in  getting, 
Which  was  a  sin,  yet  in  bestowing,  madam, 
He  was  most  princely. " — Hen.  VIII.  iv.  2.  55. 


2i4  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  If  it  were  so  it  was  a  grievous  fault."— J.  C.  iil  2.  84. 
So,  beginning  with  certainty  : 

"  She  that  was  ever  fair  and  never  proud.  "—Othello,  ii.  1. 149. 
and  ending  with  doubt  : 

"  She  was  a  wight,  jfever  such  wight  were"—Ib.  ii.  I.  159. 
In  dependent  sentences  even  after  "  know,"  as  well  as  "  think  :" 
"  I  would  I  had  thy  inches  :  thou  shouldst  know 

There  were  a  heart  in  Egypt." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  41. 
"  Which  of  your  friends  have  I  not  strove  to  love, 

Although  I  knew  he  were  mine  enemy." — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  31. 
"  Imagine 'twere  the  right  Vincentio. "— T:  of  Sh.  iv.  4.  12. 
"  As  who  should  say  in  Rome  no  justice  were." — T.  A.  iv.  3.  20. 
"  But  that  it  eats  our  victuals,  I  should  think 

Here  were  a  fairy." — Cymb.  iii.  6.  42. 

"  He  will  lie,  sir,  with  such  volubility  that  you  would  think  truth 
w^  a  fool."— A.   W.  iv.  3.  285.* 

302.  Were  is  used  after  "  while"  in 

"  If  they  would  yield  us  but  the  superfluity  while  it  were  whole- 
some."—^™?/, i.  i.  18. 
and,  still  more  remarkably,  after  "until,"  referring  to  the  past,  in 

"  It  hath  been  taught  us  from  the  primal  state      .:•  - 
That  he  which  is,  was  wish'd  until  he  were. " 

A.  and  C.  i.  4.  42. 

The    following    is    contrary  to    our   usage,    though    a    natural 
attraction  : 

"  And  they  it  were  that  ravished  our  sister."— 7*.  A.  v.  3.  99. 
for  "  it  was  they."     See  425  at  end. 

Can.    See  May,  307. 

303.  DO,  Did  :  Original  USe      In  Early  as  in  modern  English, 
the  present  and  past  indefinite  of  the  indicative  were  generally  repre- 
sented by  inflected  forms,  as  "He  comes, ""He  came,"  without  the  aid 
of  do  or  did.     Do  was  then  used  only  in  the  sense  of  "to  cause," 
"  to  make,"  &c.  ;  and  in  this  sense  was  followed  by  an  infinitive. 

*  In  this  and  many  other  instances  the  verb  in  the  second  clause  may  be  at- 
tracted into  the  subjunctive  by  the  subjunctive  in  the  first  clause. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  215 

"They  have  done  her  understonde. "— GOWER.* 
i.f.  "  they  have  caused  her  to  understand." 

Similarly  it  is  used  like  the  French  "  faire  "  or  "  laisser  "  with  the 
ellipsis  of  the  person  who  is  "  caused  "  to  do  the  action,  thus — 

"Do  stripen  me  and  put  me  in  a  sakke, 
And  in  the  nexte  river  do  me  drenche." 

CHAUCER,  Marchantis  Tale,  10,074. 

i.e.  "cause  (some  one)  to  strip  me — to  drench  me." 

In  the  same  way  "  let  "  is  repeatedly  used  in  Early  English  : 

"  He  let  make  Sir  Kay  seneschal  of  England." — Morte  d' }  Arthur. 

where  a  later  author  might  have  written  "  he  did  make." 

Gradually  the  force  of  the  infinitive  inflection  en  was  weakened 

and  forgotten;  thus  "do  stripen"  became  "do  strip,"  and  do  was 

used  without  any  notion  of  causation,  f 
Sometimes  do  is  reduplicated,  as  : 

"  And  thus  he  did  do  slen  hem  alle  three.  "—CHAUCER,  C.  T.  7624. 

or  used  with  "  let,"  as  in 

"  He  let  the  feste  of  his  nativitee 
Don  crien."— CHAUCER,  C.  T.  10,360. 

The  verb  was  sometimes  used  transitively  with  an  objective 
noun,  as  : 

"  He  did  thankingys. "— WICKLIFFE,  St.  Matt.  xv.  36. 
and  so  in  Shakespeare  in 

"Do  me  some  charity." — Lear,  iii.  4.  61. 

"  This  fellow  did  the  third  (daughter)  a  blessing." 

Lear,  i.  4.  115. 

"  Do  my  good-morrow  to  them." — Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  26. 
"  To  do  you  salutation  from  his  master." 

J.  C.  iv.  2.  5  ;  Rich.  III.  v.  3.  210. 

"  After  the  last  enchantment  you  did  here." — T.  N.  iii.  1. 123. 
and  in  the  words  "to  don,"  i.e.  "put  on,"  and  "dout,"  i.e. 
"put  out." 

But  as  a  rule  do  had  become  a  mere  auxiliary,  so  that  we  even 
find  it  an  auxiliary  to  itself,  as  in 

"  Who  does  do  you  wrong?" — T.  N.  v.  I.  143. 

*  Quoted  from  Richardson's  Dictionary. 

t  The  question  may  arise  why  do  was  preferred  to  let  as  an  auxiliary  verb. 
Probably  the  ambiguity  of  let,  which  meant  both  "suffer  "and  "hinder,"  was 
an  obstacle  to  its  general  use. 


216  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

304.  Do,  did.  How  used  by  Shakespeare?  In  St.  Matt. 
xv.  37,  Wickliffe  has  "and  alle  eten;"  Tyndal,  &c.,  "all  dia 
eat."  It  is  probable  that  one  reason  for  inserting  the  did  here  was 
the  similarity  between  the  present  and  past  of  "eat,"  and  the  desire 
to  avoid  ambiguity.  In  the  following  verse,  however,  Wickliffe  has 
"etun,"  Tyndal  "ate,"  and  the  rest  "did  eat."  This  shows  how 
variable  was  the  use  of  did  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  what  slight 
causes  determined  its  use  or  non-use.  The  following  passage  in 
connection  with  the  above  would  seem  to  show  that  did  was  joined 
to  eat  to  avoid  ambiguity,  and  when  it  was  not  joined  to  other 
verbs  : 

' '  And  the  Peloponnesians  did  eat  it  up  while  the  Byzantines 
<//«/.  "-N.  P.  1 80. 


It  can  hardly  be  denied  that  in  such  lines  as 

lifted  up  it  (so  Folio)  head,  an 
elf  to  motion," — Hamlet,  i.  2. 


It  lifted  up  it  (so  Folio)  head,  and  did  address 
Itself  to  motion,"— Hamlet,  i.  2.  216. 


the  did  is  omitted  in  the  first  verb  and  inserted  in  the  second  simply 
for  the  sake  of  the  metre.  Did  is  commonly  used  in  excited 
narrative  : 

"  Horses  did  neigh,  and  dying  men  did  grow, 
And  ghosts  did  shriek  and  squeal  about  the  streets. " 

J.  C.  ii.  2.  23. 
"The  sheeted  dead 
Did  squeak  and  gibber  in  the  Roman  streets. " 

Hamlet,  i.  I.  116. 

But  in  both  the  above  passages  the  inflection  in  -ed  is  also  used. 

305.  Verbs:    "Do"  omitted  before   "Not."     in  Early 

English  the  tenses  were  represented  by  their  inflections,  and  there 
was  no  need  of  the  auxiliary  "do."  As  the  inflections  were  dis- 
used, "do"  came  into  use,  and  was  frequently  employed  by  Eliza- 
bethan authors.  They,  however,  did  not  always  observe  the  modern 
rule  of  using  the  auxiliary  whenever  not  precedes  the  verb.  Thus— 

"I  not  doubt."—  Temp.  ii.  i.  121. 

"  Whereof  the  ewe  not  bites." — Ib.  v.  i.  38. 

"  It  not  belongs  to  you."— 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  i.  98. 

"  It  not  appears  to  me." — Ib.  107. 

"  Hear  you  bad  writers  and  though  you  not  see." 

"  BEAUMONT  on  B.  J. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  217 

"  On  me  whose  all  not  equals  Edward's  moiety." 

Rich.  III.  i.  2.  259. 

"  Neat  Terence,  witty  Plautus,  now  not  please." 

B.  J.  on  Shakespeare. 
Less  commonly  in  a  subordinate  sentence 

"  I  beseech  you  .  .  .  that  you  not  delay." — Coriol.  i.  6.  60. 
Later,  a  rule  was  adopted  that  either  the  verb,  or  the  auxiliary  part 
of  it,  must  precede  the  negative:  "I  doubt  not,"  or  "I  do  not 
doubt."  Perhaps  this  may  be  explained  as  follows.  The  old 
English  negative  was  "ne."  It  came  before  the  verb,  and  was 
often  supplemented  by  a  negative  adverb  "nawicht,"  "nawt," 
"noht"  (which  are  all  different  forms  of  "no  whit"  or  "naught"), 
coming  after  the  verb. 

"  His  hors  was  good,  but  he  ne  was  not  gaie." 

CHAUCER,  C.  T.  74. 

(Compare  in  French  "ne.  .  .  pas, "  in  Latin,  "non(nenu),  "*'.<?.  "ne. . . 
unum.")  In  the  fifteenth  century  (Matzner)  this  reduplication  began 
to  pass  out  of  fashion.  In  Shakespeare's  time  it  had  been  forgotten ; 
but,  perhaps,  we  may  trace  its  influence  in  the  double  negative 
' '  nor  will  not,"  &c.,  which  is  common  in  his  works. 

"  Vex  not  yourself,  nor  strive  not  with  your  breath." 

Kick.  II.  ii.  i.  3. 

Possibly  the  idiom  now  under  consideration  is  also  a  result  of  the 
Early  English  idiom.  The  not,  which  had  ousted  the  old  dual  nega- 
tive "ne"  ...  "not,"  may  have  been  thought  entitled  to  a  place 
either  before  or  after  the  verb.  Latin,  moreover,  would  tend  in  the 
same  direction.  It  must  further  be  remembered  that  not  is  now  less 
emphatic  than  it  was,  when  it  retained  the  meaning  of  "naught"  or 
"no-whit."  We  can  say,  "I  in-no-ivay  trust  you,"  or,  perhaps, 
even  "  I  no-iv/iit  trust  you,"  but  not  is  too  unemphatic  to  allow  us  to 
say  "I  not  trust  you."  Hence  the  "do"  is  now  necessary  to 
receive  a  part  of  the  emphasis. 

Not  is  sometimes  found  in  E.  E.  and  A.-S.  between  the  subject 
and  the  verb,  especially  in  subordinate  sentences  where  the  not, 
"no-whit,"  is  emphatic. 

306.  Do,  Did,  omitted  and  inserted.    In  modem  English 

prose  there  is  now  an  established  rule  for  the  insertion  and  omission 
of  do  and  did.  They  are  inserted  in  negative  and  interrogative 
sentences,  for  the  purpose  of  including  the  "not"  or  the  subject  of 


2i8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

the  interrogation  between  the  two  parts  of  the  verb,  so  as  to  avoid 
ambiguity.  Thus  :  "  Do  our  subjects  revolt  ?"  "Do  not  forbid  him." 
They  are  not  inserted  except  for  the  purpose  of  unusual  emphasis  in 
indicative  sentences  such  as  "I  remember."  In  Elizabethan  English 
no  such  rule  had  yet  been  established,  and  we  find — 

"Revolt  our  subjects ? "—Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  100. 
"  Forbid  him  not."— Mark  ix.  39.  E.  V. 
On  the  other  hand — 

"I  do  remember."—  T.  N.  iii.  3.  48. 

This  licence  of  omission  sometimes  adds  much  to  the  beauty  and 
vigour  of  expression. 

"Gives  not  the  hawthorn-bush  a  sweeter  shade?" 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  42. 
is  far  more  natural  and  vigorous  than 

"Does  not  the  hawthorn -bush  give  sweeter  shade  ?" 

307,  Can,  May,  Might,  May  originally  meant  "to  be  able  " 
'E.  E.  "mag;"  A.-S.  "magan;"  German  "mogen").  A  trace 
of  this  meaning  exists  in  the  noun  "might,"  which  still  means 
1 '  ability. "  Thus  we  find 

"  I  am  so  hungry  that  I  may  (can)  not  slepe." 

CHAUCER,  Monke's  Tale,  14,744. 
"  Now  help  me,  lady,  sith  ye  may  and  can." 

Knightfs  Tale,  2,314. 

In  the  last  passage  may  means  "can,"  and  "ye  can  "means  "ye 
have  knowledge  or  skill."  This,  the  original  meaning  of  "can,"  is 
found,  though  very  rarely,  in  Shakespeare  : 

"  I've  seen  myself  and  served  against  the  French, 
And  they  can  well  on  horseback." — Hamlet,  iv.  7.  85. 

i.e.  "  they  are  well  skilled." 

"  And  the  priest  in  surplice  white 

That  defunctive  music  can." — Phcenix  and  Turtle,  14. 
And  perhaps  in 

"  The  sum  of  all  I  can,  I  have  disclosed  ; 
Why  or  for  what  these  nobles  were  committed 
Is  all  \mknown  to  me,  my  gracious  lady." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  46. 
"  The  strong'st  suggestion 
Our  worser  genius  can  " — Tempest,  iv.  I.  27. 


,  AUXILIARY,  219 

A  trace  of  this  emphatic  use  of  can  is  found  in 

"  What  can  man's  wisdom 

In  the  restoring  his  bereaved  sense?" — Lear,  iv.  4.  8. 
But,  as  "  can  "  (which  even  in  A.-S.  meant  "  I  know  how  to"  and 
therefore  "I  am  able  ")  gradually  began  to  encroach  on  may,  and  to 
assume  the  meaning  "to  be  able, "  may  was  compelled  to  migrate 
from  "  ability  "  to  "  possibility  "  and  "  lawfulness."  Thus  "  mogen" 
signifies  moral,  "  konnen  "  physical,  possibility.  In  the  following 
passage  : 

"  From  hence  it  conies  that  this  babe's  bloody  hand 

May  not  be  cleansed  with  water  of  this  well," — F.  Q.  ii.  JO. 
it  is  not  easy  at  once  to  determine  whether  may  means  '"can"  or 
"is  destined,"  "  must,"  "ought."     Hence  we  are  prepared  for  the 
transition  which  is  illustrated  thus  by  Bacon  :* 

' '  For  what  he  may  do  is  of  two  kinds,  what  he  may  do  as  just 
and  what  he  may  do  as  possible." 

308.  May  in    "  I  may  come  "  is  therefore  ambiguous,  since  it 
may  signify  either  "lawfulness,"  as  in  "I  may  come  if  I  like,"  or 
"  possibility,"  as  in  "  I  may  come,  but  don't  wait  for  me."     In  the 
latter  sentence  the  "  possibility "  is  transposed  so  as  to  include  the 
whole  sentence  "it  is  possible  that  I  may  come,"  just  as — 

"  He  needs  not  our  mistrust," — Macb.  iii.  3.  2. 
means  "it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  mistrust  him." 

309.  May  is  used  with  various  shades  of  the  meaning  of  "per- 
mission," "possibility,"  &c. : 

"  He  shall  know  you  better,  sir,  if  I  may  live  to  report  you. " 

M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  172. 
i.e.  "if  I  am  permitted  by  heaven  to  live  long  enough." 

It  is  a  modest  way  of  stating  what  ought  to  be  well  known,  in 
"If  you  may  please  to  think  I  love  the  king/'—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  532. 
"  A  score  of  ewes  may  be  worth  ten  pounds. " — 2  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.57. 
i.e.  "is possibly  worth  ten  pounds."     "May  be"  is  often  thus  used 
almost  adverbially  for  possibly. 
In         "  Season  your  admiration  for  awhile 

Till  I  may  deliver,"— Ha mlet,  i.  2.  193. 
may  means  "  can,"  "  have  time  to." 

"May  (can)  it  be  possible ? "—Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  100. 
*   Quoted  from  Todd's  "Johnson." 


220  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

310.  May  With   a   Negative.       Thus  far  Elizabethan   and 
modern  English  agree  ;  but  when  a  negative  is  introduced,  a  diver- 
gence appears. 

In  "I  may  not-come"  may  would  with  us  mean  "possibility,"  and 
the  "not "  would  be  connected  with  "  come  "  instead  of  may  ;  "  my 
not-coming  is  a  possibility."  On  the  other  hand,  the  Elizabethans 
frequently  connect  the  "not"  with  may,*  and  thus  with  them  "I 
may-nut  come"  might  mean  "  I  can-not  or  must-not  come."  Thus 
may  is  parallel  to  "  must  "  in  the  following  passage  : — 

"Yet  I  must  not, 

For  certain  friends  that  are  both  his  and  mine, 
Whose  loves  I  may  not  drop." — Macb.  iii.  I.  122. 

Probably  this  disuse  of  may  in  "may  not"  (in  the  sense  of 
"must  not")  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  "may  not" 
implies  compulsion,  and  may  has  therefore  been  supplanted  in  this 
sense  by  the  more  compulsory  "  must." 

311.  May  used  for  the  old  subjunctive  in  the  sense  of 
purpose. 

If  we  compare  Wickliffe's  with  the  sixteenth-century  Versions 
of  the  New  Testament,  it  appears  that,  in  the  interval,  the  sub- 
junctive had  lost  much  of  its  force,  and  consequently  the  use  of 
auxiliary  verbs  to  supply  the  place  of  the  subjunctive  had  largely 
increased. 

In  I  Cor.  iv.  8,  Wickliffe  has,  "  And  I  wold  that  ye  regne, 
that  also  we  regnen  with  you,"  where  the  later  Versions,  "And 
I  would  to  God  that  ye  did  reign,  that  we  also  might  reign."  So 
also  Col.  i.  28:  "Techynge  eche  man  in  al  wisdom;  that  we 
oftre  eche  man  perfight,"  where  the  rest  have  "that  we  may  offer" 
or  "  to  offer."  So  ib.  25,  "  that  Ifille  the  word  of  God"  for  "  that  I 
may  fulfil."  But  may  is  found  very  early  used  with  its  modal  force 

The  subjunctive  of  purpose  is  found  in — 

"  Go  bid  thy  mistress  ...  she  strike  upon  the  bell. "— Macb.  ii.  I.  31. 
"Sir,  give  me  this  water  that  I  thirst  not." — St.  John  iv.  15. 
"  He  wiHs  you,  in  the  name  of  God  Almighty, 
That  you  divest  yourself." — Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  78. 
But  it  was  not  easy  to  distinguish  the  subjunctive  representing  an 

*  So  in  ante-Elizabethan  English,  and  in  Spenser,  we  find  "  nill,"  "  not,"  for 
"will  not,"  "wot  not,"  "  nam  "  for  "am  not,"  &c.  "Cannot"  is  also  a  trace 
of  the  closo  connection  between  the  verb  and  the  accompanying  negative. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  221 

object,  from  the  indicative  representing  a  fact,  since  both  were  used 
after  "that,"  and  there  was  nothing  but  their  inflections  (which 
are  similar  in  the  plural)  to  distinguish  the  two.  The  following  is 
an  instance  of  the  indicative  following  "  that :" — 

"But  freshly  looks  and  over-bears  attaint 
With  cheerful  semblance  and  sweet  majesty, 
That  every  wretch  pining  and  pale  before, 
Beholding  him,  plucks  comfort  from  his  looks." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  Prologue,  39. 

Hence  arose  the  necessity,  as  the  subjunctive  inflections  lost  their 
force,  of  inserting  some  word  denoting  "possibility"  or  "futurity" 
to  mark  the  subjunctive  of  purpose.  "  Will "  is  apparently  used  in 
this  sense  as  follows : — 

"Therefore  in  fierce  tempest  is  he  coming, 
In  thunder  and  in  earthquake  like  a  Jove, 
That,  if  requiring  fail,  he  -will  compel." — Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  99. 

But,  as  a  rule,  may  was  used  for  the  present  subjunctive  and  might 
for  the  past,  according  to  present  usage.     "  That "  is  omitted  in 
"  Direct  mine  arms  I  may  embrace  his  neck." — I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  37. 
i.e.  "that  I  may  embrace." 

In     "  Lord  marshal,  command  our  officers  at  arms 

.#<? ready  to  direct  these  home  alarms," — Rich.  II.  i.  I.  204-5. 

it  is  doubtful  whether  "be"  is  the  subjunctive  or  the  infinitive  with 
"to"  omitted  (349).  I  prefer  the  former  hypothesis,  supplying 
"  that "  after  "  command."  Compare 

"  Some  one  take  order  Buckingham  be  brought 
To  Salisbury."— Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  539. 

So  "  that"  is  omitted  before  " shall  :" 

"  The  queen  hath  heartily  consented  he  shall  espouse  Elizabeth." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  5.  18. 

312.  Might,  the  past  tense  of  may,  was  originally  used  in  the 
sense  of  "was  able  "  or  "  could." 

"  He  was  of  grete  elde  and  might  not  travaile." — R.  BRUNNE. 
So    "That  mought  not  be  distinguish'd." — 3  Hen.  VI.  v.  2.  45. 

"  So  loving  to  my  mother, 
That  he  might  not  beteem  the  winds  of  heaven 
Visit  her  face  too  roughly." — Hamlet,  \.  2.  141. 
i.e.  "coutdnot  bring  himself  to  allow  the  winds,"  &c. 


222  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

It  answers  to  "  can"  in  the  following  : — 

"Ang.  Look,  what  I  will  not  that  I  cannot  do. 
Isab.  But  might  you  do't,  and  do  the  world  no  wrong  ?  " 

M.  for  M.  ii.  2.  52. 

"Might  you  not  know  she  would  do  as  she  has  done ?" 

A.   W.  iii.  4.  2. 
i.e.  "  Could  you  not  know." 

"  I  might  not  this  believe 
Without  the  sensible  and  true  avouch 
Of  mine  own  eyes." — Hamlet,  i.  i.  56. 

"  But  I  might  see  young  Cupid's  fiery  shaft  quench'd  in  the  chaste 
beams  of  the  wat'ry  moon."— M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  161. 

"In  that  day's  feats, 

When  he  might  act  the  woman  in  the  scene, 
He  proved  best  man  i'  the  field." — Coriol.  ii.  2.  100. 
i.e.  "when  he  was  young  enough  to  be  able  to  play  the  part  of  a 
woman  on  the  stage." 

Might  naturally  followed  may  through  the  above-mentioned 
changes.  Care  must  be  taken  to  distinguish  between  the  indicative 
and  the  conditional  use  of  might.  "How  might  that  be ? "  (indica- 
tive) would  mean  "How  was  it  possible  for  that  to  take  place?" 
On  the  other  hand,  "  How  might  that  be  ?"  (subjunctive)  would  mean 
"  How  would  it  be  possible  hereafter  that  this  should  take  place  ?  " 
The  same  ambiguity  still  attends  "could."  Thus  "How  could 
I  thus  forget  myself  yesterday !"  but  "  How  could  I  atone  to-morrow 
for  my  forgetfulness  yesterday  ?  " 

313.  May,  Might,  like  other  verbs  in  Elizabethan  English,  are 
frequently  used  optatively.      We  still  use  may  thus,  as  in  "May  he 
prosper  !  "  but  seldom  or  never  might.     But  it  is  clear  that — 

"Would  I  might 
But  ever  see  that  man," — Temp.  \.  2.  168. 

naturally  passes  into  "  Might  I  but  see  that  man,"    Thus  we  have — 
"  Lord  worshipped  mightte  be."— AT.  of  V.  ii.  2.  98. 

314.  Must  (E.  E.  moste)  is  the  past  tense  of  the  E.  E.  present 
tense  mof,  which  means    "he  is  able,"  "he  is  obliged."      From 
meaning  "he  had  power  to  do  it,"  or  "might  have  done  it,"  the 
word  came  to  mean  "ought, "and  it  is  by  us  generally  used  with 
a  notion  of  compulsion.    But  it  is  sometimes  used  by  Shakespeare  to 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  223 

mean  no  more  than  definite  futurity,  like  our  "is  to"  in  "He 
is  to  be  here  to-morrow. " 

"  He  must  fight  singly  to-morrow  with  Hector,  and  is  so  pro- 
phetically proud  of  an  heroical  cudgelling  that  he  raves  in  saying 
nothing/'—  Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  247. 

So,  or  nearly  so,  probably  in 

"  Descend,  for  you  must  be  my  sword-bearer." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  6.  40. 

And  somewhat  similar,  without  the  notion  of  compulsion,  is  the  use 
in  M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  182 ;  Af.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  72. 
It  seems  to  mean  "is,  or  was,  destined"  in 

"And  I  must  be  from  thence."— Macbeth,  iv.  3.  212. 

So  "A  life  which  must  not  yield 

To  one  of  woman  born." — Ib.  v.  8.  12. 

315,  Shall.  Shall  for  -will.  Shall  meaning  "to  owe"  is  con- 
nected with  "ought,"  "must,"*  "it  is  destined." 

Thus, 

"  If  then  we  shall  shake  off  our  slavish  yoke, 
Imp  out  our  drooping  country's  broken  wing, 
Away  with  me."— Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  291. 

i.e.  "  if  we  are  to,  ought  to." 

' '  Fair  Jessica  shall  be  my  torch-bearer. " — M.  of  V.  ii.  4.  40. 
i.e.  "is  to  be." 

Hence  shall  was  used  by  the  Elizabethan  authors  with  all  three 
persons  to  denote  inevitable  futurity  without  reference  to  "will" 
(desire). 

"  If  much  you  note  him, 
You  shall  offend  him  and  extend  his  passion." — Macb.  iii.  4.  57. 

i.e.  "  you  are  sure  to  offend  him." 

So  probably, 

"Nay,  it  will  please  him  well,  Kate,  it  shall  (\s  sure  to)  please  him." 

Hen.  V.  v.  2.  369. 
"  My  country 
Shall  have  more  vices  than  it  had  before." — Macb.  iv.  3.  47. 

"  And,  if  I  die,  no  man  shall  pity  me." — Rich.  III.  v.  3.  201. 
i.e.  "it  is  certain  that  no  man  will  pity  me." 
*  "  Thou  shall  not,"  &c. 


224  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

There  is  no  notion  of  compulsion  on  the  part  of  the  person 
speaking  in 

"  They  shall  (are  sure  to)  be  apprehended  by  and  by." 

Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  2. 
"  If  they  do  this  (conquer), 
As,  if  please  God,  they  shall  (are  destined  to  do)." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  120. 
The  notion  of  necessity,  must,  seems  to  be  conveyed  in 

"  He  that  parts  us  shall  bring  a  brand  from  heaven, 
And  fire  us  hence  like  foxes. " — Lear,  v.  3.  22. 

In        "  He  shall  wear  his  crown,"— J.  C.  i.  3.  87. 
shall  means  "  is  to. "     So  in 

''Your  grace  shall  understand." — M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  149. 
"  What  is  he  that  shall  (is  to)  buy  ?  "— A.  Y.  L.  ii.  4.  88. 
' '  Men  shall  deal  unadvisedly  sometimes. " 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  292. 
i.e.  "  men  cannot  help  making  mistakes." 

"  He  that  escapes  me  without  some  broken  limb  shall  (must,  will 
have  to),  acquit  him  well." — A.  Y.  L.  i.  I.  134. 
"  K.       Desire  them  all  to  my  pavilion. 
Glost.  We  shall,  my  lord."— Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  27. 

In  the  last  passage,  " I  shall'1''  has  a  trace  of  its  old  meaning,  "  I 
ought:"  or  perhaps  there  is  a  mixture  of  "I  am  bound  to"  and 
"  I  am  sure  to."  Hence  it  is  often  used  in  the  replies  of  inferiors  to 
superiors. 

"     King  Henry.   Collect  them  all  together  at  my  tent : 
I'll  be  before  thee. 

Erpingham.     I  shall  do't,  my  lord." — Hen.  V.  iv.  i.  305. 
"Fear  not,  my  lord,  your  servant  shall  do  so." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  268. 

So  A.   W.  v.  3.    27 ;  A.   and  C.   iii.    12.    36,   iv.    6.   3,  v.    I.    3  ; 
Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  126  ;  M.  for  M.  iv.  4.  21 ;  A.  and  C.  v.  I.  68. 

"  You  shall  see,  find,"  &c.,  was  especially  common  in  the  mean- 
ing "you  may,"  "you  will,"  applied  to  that  which  is  of  common 
occurrence,  or  so  evident  that  it  cannot  but  be  seen. 

"  You  shall  mark 

Many  a  duteous  and  knee-crooking  slave, 
That,  doting  on  his  own  obsequious  bondage, 
Wears  out  his  time.     Whip  me  such  honest  knaves." 

Othello,  i.  i.  440. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  225 

Shall  is  sometimes  colloquially  or  provincially  abbreviated  into 
sr,  s: 

"  Thou'j  hear  our  counsel."— ^.  and  J.  i.  3.  9. 
"  I'st  try."—Ltar,  iv.  6.  246.     (See  461.) 

316.  Will.    YOU  Will.     He  will.    Later,  a  reluctance  to  apply 
a  word  meaning  necessity  and  implying  compulsion*  to  a  person 
addressed  (second  person),  or  spoken  of  (third  person),  caused  post- 
Elizabethan  writers  to  substitute  will  for  shall  with  respect  to  the 
second  and  third  persons,  even  where  no  will  at  all,  i.e.  no  purpose, 
is  expressed,  but  only  futurity.     Thus  will  has  to  do  duty  both  as 
7f///  proper,  implying  purpose,  and  also  as  will  improper,  implying 
merely  futurity.     Owing  to  this   unfortunate  imposition  of  double 
work   upon  will,  it  is  sometimes  impossible  to  determine,  except 
from  emphasis  or  from  the  context,  whether  will  signifies  purpose 
or  mere  futurity.      Thus   (l)    "He  will  come,   I   cannot   prevent 
him,"  means  "  He  wills  (or  is  determined)  to  come  ;"  but  (2)  "  He 
will  come,  though  unwillingly,"  means  ' '  His  coming  is  certain." 

Will  is  seldom  used  without  another  verb  : 

"  I  will  no  reconcilement." — Hamlet,  v.  2.  258. 
So  in    "I  will  none  of  it."     (See  521.) 

317.  Shall.    YOU  shall.    He  Shall.     On  the  other  hand  shall, 
being  deprived  by  will  of  its  meaning  of  futurity,  gradually  took  up 
the  meaning  of  compulsory  necessity  imposed  by  the  first  person  on 
the  second  or  third.     Thus:  "You  shall  not  go,"  or  even  "You 
shall  find  I  am  truly  grateful."     (Not   "you  will  find,"  but  "I 
will  so  act  that  you  shall  perforce  find,"  &c.) 

The  prophetic  shall  ("it  shall  come  to  pass  ")  which  is  so  common 
in  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible,  probably  conveyed  to  the  ori- 
ginal translators  little  or  nothing  more  than  the  meaning  of  futurity. 
But  now  with  us  the  prophetic  shall  implies  that  the  prophet  iden- 
tifies himself  with  the  necessity  which  he  enunciates.  Thus  the 
Druid  prophesying  the  fall  of  Rome  to  Boadicea  says — 

"Rome  shall  perish." — COWPER. 

*  Coriol.  iii.  i.  90,  "Mark  you  his  absolute  'shall.'"  A  similar  feeling  sug- 
gested the  different  methods  of  expressing  an  imperative  in  Latin  and  Greek, 
and  the  substitution  of  the  optative  with  UK  for  the  future  in  Greek. 


226  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

318.  Shall.     I  shall.     When  a  person  speaks  of  his  own  future 
actions  as  inevitable,    he  often  regards  them   as  inevitable  only 
because  fixed  by  himself.     Hence  "  I  shall  not  forgive  you  "  means 
simply,    "/  have  fixed  not   to  forgive  you;"     but  "I  shall  be 
drowned,"  "My  drowning  is  fixed."     (See  315.) 

319,  Will.    "I  wilt."   Some  passages  which  are  quoted  to  prove 
that  Shakespeare  used  will  with  the  first  person  without  implying 
wish,  desire,  &c.,  do  not  warrant  such  an  inference. 

In  Hamlet,  v.  2.  183,  "I  will  win  for  him,  if  I  can  ;  if  not,  I  will 
gain  nothing  but  my  shame  and  the  odd  hits,"  the  will  is  probably 
used  by  attraction  with  a  jesting  reference  to  the  previous  "  will :" 
"My  purpose  is  to  win  if  I  can,  or,  if  not,  to  gain  shame  and  the 
odd  hits." 

"       There  is  no  hope  that  ever  I  will  stay 
If  the  first  hour  I  shrink  and  run  away." — I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  5.  30. 

i.e.  "  There  is  no  hope  of  my  ever  being  willing  to  stay." 

"I7/do  well  yet."—  Coriol.  iv.  I.  21. 
/./.  "  I  intend  to  do  well  yet." 

•"  I  will  not  reason  what  is  meant  hereby, 
Because  I  will  (desire  to)  be  guiltless  of  the  meaning." 

Rich.  III.  i.  4.  95. 

In  "  I  will  sooner  have  a  beard  grow  in  the  palm  of  my  hand 
than  he  shall  get  one  on  his  cheek,"  —2  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  23. 

there  is  a  slight  meaning  of  purpose,  as  though  it  were,  "I  witt 
sooner  make  a  beard  grow,"  derived  from  the  similarity  in  sound 
of  the  common  phrase  ' '  I  will  sooner  die,  starve,  than,  &c. " 

In  "  Good  argument,  I  hope,  we  will  not  fly," — Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  113. 
the  meaning  appears  to.be  "good  argument,  I  hope,  that  we  have 
no  intention  of  flying." 

There  is  a  difficulty  in  the  expression  "perchance  I  will ;"  but, 
from  its  constant  recurrence,  it  would  seem  to  be  a  regular  idiom. 
Compare  the  following  passages  : — 

"Perchance,  lago,  I  will  ne'er  go  home."—  Othello,  v.  2.  197. 

"Perchance  I  will  be  there  as  soon  as  you."—  C.  of  E.  iv.  i. 

"Perhaps  I  will  return  immediately/'—^/,  of  V.  ii.  5.  52. 
In  all  these  passages  "perchance "precedes,  and  the  meaning  se 
to  be  in  the  last  example,  for  instance  :  "  My  purpose  may,  perhaps, 
be  fulfilled,"  and  "my  purpose  is  to  return  immediately,"  or,  in 


: 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  227 

other  words,  "If  possible,  I  intend  to  return  immediately."  In 
all  these  cases,  the  "perhaps"  stands  by  itself.  It  does  not  qualify 
"will,"  but  the  whole  of  the  following  sentence. 

In     "I  will  live  to  be  thankful  to  thee  for't,"—  T.  N.  iv.  2,  88. 
the  will  refers,  not  to  live,  but  to  "live-to-be-thankful,"  and  the 
sentence  means  "I  purpose  in  my  future  life  to  prove  my  thank- 
fulness." 

320.  Will  is  sometimes  used  with  the  second  person  (like  the 
Greek  optative  with  Av)  to  signify  an  imperative.     It  is  somewhat 
ironical,  like  our  "You  will  be  kind  enough  to  be  quiet,"     Perhaps 
originally  an   ellipsis,  as   in   Greek,   was   consciously  understood, 
"You  will  be  quiet  (if  you  are  wise),"  &c. 

"  You'//  leave  your  noise  anon,  ye  rascals." — Hen^  VIII.  v.  4.  1. 

In     "  Gloucester,  thou  wilt  answer  this  before  the  pope," 

I  Hen.  VI.  \.  3.  62. 
there  is  no  imperative,  but  there  is  irony. 

On  the  other  hand,  "you  will"  perhaps,  means  " you  are  willing 
and  prepared"  in  : 

"  Portia.  You  know  I  say  nothing  to  him  :  he  hath  neither  Latin, 
French,  nor  Italian,  and  you  will  come  into  court  and  swear  that 
I  have  a  poor  pennyworth  in  the  English. "— M.  of  V.  i,  2.  75. 

321.  Will,  with  the  third  person.     Difficult  passages. 
The  following  is  a  perplexing  passage  : — 

"  If  it  will  not  be  (i.e.  if  you  will  not  leave  me)  I'll  leave  you." — 
M.  Ado,  ii.  i.  208. 

Here  the  meaning  seems  to  be  "  if  it  is  not  to  be  otherwise,"  and 
in  Elizabethan  English  we  might  expect  shall.  But  probably  "it" 
represents  fate,  and,  as  in  the  phrase,  "come  what  will"  the  future 
is  personified  :  "  If  fate  will  not  be  as  I  would  have  it."  And  this 
explains 

"  What  shall  become  of  (as  the  result  of)  this?  What  will  this 
do?"— M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  211. 

The  indefinite  unknown  consequence  is  not  personified,  the 
definite  project  is  personified.  "  What  is  destined  to  result  from  this 
project  ?  What  does  this  project  intend  to  do  for  us  ?" 

"  My  eye  will  scarcely  see  \\."—Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  104. 
means  "  can  scarcely  be  induced  to  see  it." 
Q  2 


228  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  He  will"  means  "he  will  have  it  that,"  "  he  pretends,"  in 

"  This  is  a  riddling  merchant  for  the  nonce  ; 
He  -will  be  here,  and  yet  he  is  not  here."— I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  3.  58. 

In  "  She'// none  of  me,"—  T.  N.  i.  3.  113. 

"will"  means   "desires,"    "none"    "nothing,"   and    "of"    "as 
regards"  (173),  "to  do  with." 

322.  Should.    Should  is  the  past  tense  of  shall,  and  underwent 
the  same  modifications  of  meaning  as  shall.     Hence  should  is  not 
now  used  with  the  second  person  to  denote  mere  futurity,  since  it 
suggests  a  notion,  if  not  of  compulsion,   at  least  of  bounden  duty. 
Hut  in  a  conditional   phrase,    "  If  you   should  refuse,"   there    can 
be  no  suspicion  of  compulsion.     We  therefore  retain  this  use   of 
should  in  the  conditional  clause,  but  use  would  in  the  consequent 
clause  : 

"  If  you  should  refuse,  you  would  do  wrong." 
On  the  other  hand,  Shakespeare  used  should  in  both  clauses  : 

"  You  should  refuse  to  perform  your  father's  will  if  you  should 
refuse  to  accept  him."— M.  of  V.  i.  2.  100. 

And  should  is  frequently  thus  used  to  denote  contingent  futurity. 

"  They  told  me  here,  at  dead  time  of  the  night, 
Ten  thousand  swelling  toads,  as  many  urchins, 
Would  make  such  fearful  and  confused  cries, 
As  any  mortal  body  hearing  it 
Should  straight  fall  mad."—  T.  A.  ii.  3.  102,  104. 
"  Would "  =  "were  in  the  habit."     Comp.  tyl\ovr. 

"  (In  that  case)  Strength  should  be  lord  of  imbecility, 
And  the  rude  son  should  strike  the  father  dead  ; 
Force  should be  right." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  114. 

323.  Should  for  ought.     Should,  the  past  tense,  not  being  so 
imperious  as  shall,  the  present,  is  still  retained  in  the  sense  of  ought, 
applying  to  all  three  persons.     In  the  Elizabethan  authors,  however, 
it  was  more  commonly  thus  used,  often  where  we  should  use  ought: 

"  You  should  be  women  ; 
And  yet  your  beards  forbid  me  to  interpret 
That  you  are  so. " — Macbeth,  i.  3.  45. 
"  So  should^  look  that  seems  to  speak  things  strange." 

Ib.  i.  2.  46. 

'  I  should  report  that  which  I  say  I  saw, 
But  know  not  how  to  do  it" — Ib.  v.  5.  31. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  229 

"  Why  'tis  an  office  of  discovery,  love, 
And  I  should  be  obscured."—^/,  of  V.  ii.  6.  44. 

i.  f.  "  A  torch-bearer's  office  reveals  (439)  the  face,  and  mine  ought  to 
be  hidden." 

324.  Should  is  sometimes  used  as  though  it  were  the  past  tense 
of  a  verb  "  shall,"  meaning  "  is  to,"  not  quite  "ought."     Compare 
the  German  "sollen." 

"  About  his  son  that  should  (was  to)  have  married  a  shepherd's 
daughter."— W  T.  iv.  4.  795. 

"  The  Senate  heard  them  and  received  them  curteously,  and  the 
people  the  next  day  should  (were  to)  assemble  in  counsell  to  give 
them  audience." — N.  P.  Alcibiades,  170. 

In  the  following,  should  is  half-way  between  the  meaning  of 
"ought"  and  "was  to."  The  present,  shall,  or  "am  to,  "might 
be  expected  ;  but  there  is  perhaps  an  implied  past  tense,  "  I  (you 
said)  was  to  knock  you. " 

"     Petruchio.  And  rap  me  well,  or  I'll  knock  your  knave's  pate. 

Grumio.  My  master  is  grown  quarrelsome :  I  should  knock  you, 
And  then  I  know  after  who  comes  by  the  worse. " 

T.  ofSh.  i.  i.  131. 

325.  Should  was  hence  used  in  direct  questions  about  the  past, 
where  shall  was  used  about  the  future.     Thus,    "  How  shall  the 
enemy  break  in?"  i.e.  "  How  is  the  enemy  to  break  in?"  became, 
when  referred  to  the  past,  "  How  was  the  enemy  to  break  in  ?" 

"  I  was  employ 'd  in  passing  to  and  fro 
About  relieving  of  the  sentinels. 
Then  how  or  which  way  should  they  first  break  in  ?" 

.  I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  71. 

"  What  should  this  mean?"— Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  160. 
i.e.  "  what  was  this  (destined,  likely)  to  mean?"  It  seems  to  in- 
crease the  emphasis  of  the  interrogation,  since  a  doubt  about  the 
past  (time  having  been  given  for  investigation)  implies  more  per- 
plexity than  a  doubt  about  the  future.  So  we  still  say,  "Who  could 
it  be?"  "  How  old  might  you  be  ?" 

"  What  should be  in  that  Caesar?"— J.  C.  \.  2.  142. 
i.e.  "what  could  there  be,"  "what  might  there  be."  "Shall,"  "may," 
and  the  modern  "  can,"  are  closely  connected  in  meaning. 

"  Where  should  he  have  this  gold?"—  T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  398. 


230  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

In  the  following  instance,  should  depends  upon  a  verb  in  the 
present ;  but  the  verb  follows  the  dependent  clause,  which  may, 
therefore,  be  regarded  as  practically  an  independent  question. 

"  What  it  should 'be  ...  I  cannot  dream  of. "— Hamlet,  ii.  2.  7. 
But  also 

"  Put  not  yourself  into  amazement  how  should  these  things  be." 

M.  for  M.  iv.  2.  220. 

326.  Should  was  used  in  a  subordinate  sentence  after  a  simple 
past  tense,  where  shall  was  used  in  the  subordinate  sentence 
after  a  simple  present,  a  complete  present,  or  a  future.  Hence 
we  may  expect  to  find  should  more  common  in  Elizabethan 
writers  than  with  us,  in  proportion  as  shall  was  also  more  common. 
We  say  "I  will  wait  till  he  comes,"  and  very  often,  also,  "I  in- 
tended to  wait  till  he  came."  The  Elizabethans  more  correctly,  "  I 
will  wait  till  he  j/fo// come ; "  and  therefore,  also,  "I  intended  to 
wait  till  he  should  come."  Thus,  since  it  was  possible  to  say  "  I 
ask  that  I  shall  slay  him,"  Wickliffe  could  write  "They  axeden  of 
Pilate  that  thei  schulden  sle  hym  "  (Acts  yi\\\.  28);  "  They  aspiden 
hym  that  thei  schulden  fynde  cause  "  (Luke  vi.  7).  In  both  cases 
we  should  now  say  "might." 

So  "  She  replied, 

It  should 'be  better  he  became  her  guest."— A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  226. 

"  Thou  knew'st  too  well 

My  heart  was  to  thy  rudder  tied  by  the  strings, 
And  thou  shouldst  tow  me  after." — Ib.  iii.  ii.  58. 

The  verb  need  not  be  expressed,  as  in 

"  A  lioness  lay  crouching  .  .  .  with  cat-like  watch, 
When  that  the  sleeping  man  should  stir. " — A.  Y.  L.  iv.  2.  117. 

"  She  has  a  poison  which  shall  kill  you,"  becomes 

"  She  did  confess  she  had 
For  you  a  mortal  mineral,  which  being  took 
Should  ty  the  minute  feed  on  life." — Cymb.  v.  5.  51. 

This  perhaps  explains 

"  Why,  'tis  well  known  that  whiles  I  was  protector, 
Pity  was  all  the  fault  that  was  in  me, 
For  I  should melt  at  an  offender's  tears, 
And  lowly  words  were  ransom  for  their  fault." 

2  Hen.  VL  iii.  I.  126. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  231 

"  All  my  fault  is  that  I  shall  melt  (am  sure  to  melt),"  would  be- 
come "all  my  fault  was  that  I  should  melt ;"  "for"  meaning  "for 
that"  or  "because." 

"  And  (Fol.)  if  an  angel  should  have  come  to  me, 
And  told  me  Hubert  should  put  out  mine  eyes, 
I  would  not  have  believed  him."— A".  J.  iv.  I.  68-70. 

Here,  since  the  Elizabethans  could  say  "Hubert  shall,"  they  can 
also  say  "  he  told  me  Hubert  should." 

So  since  the  Elizabethans  could  say  "To  think  that  deceit  shall 
steal  such  gentle  shapes,"  they  could  also  say,  regarding  the  subor- 
dinate clause  as  referring  to  the  past, 

"  Oh,  that  deceit  should  steal  such  gentle  shapes !" 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  27. 

"  Good  God,  (to  think  that)  these  nobles  should  such  stomachs 
bear!"— i  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  90. 


327.  "  Should  have "  with  the  second  and  third  persons. 

The  use  of  "should  have  "  with  the  second  and  third  persons  is  to  be 
noted.  It  there  refers  to  the  past,  and  the  should  simply  gives  a 
conditional  force  to  "have."  It  is  incongruous  to  use  should  in  con- 
nection with  the  past,  and  hence  we  now  say  "  If  an  angel  had  come" 
in  this  sense.  When  we  use  " should \\ZVQ,"  it  refers  to  a  question 
about  the  past  which  is  to  be  answered  in  the  future.  "If  he  should 
have  forgotten  the  key,  how  should  we  get  out,"  i.e  "if,  when  he 
comes,  it  should  turn  out  that  he  had  forgotten."  Compare,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  Shakespearian  usage. 

"  Gods,  if  you 

Should  have  ta'en  vengeance  on  my  faults,  I  never 
Had  lived  to  put  on  this." — Cymb.  v.  I.  8. 

In  M.  Ado,  ii.  3.  81,  the  "  should  have  "  is  inserted,  not  in  the 
conditional  clause,  but  in  a  dependent  relative  clause.  "If  it  had 
been  a  dog  that  should  have  howled  thus,  they  would  have  killed 
him." 

328.  "  Should,"  denoting  a  statement  not  made  by  the 

Speaker.  (Compare  "sollen"  in  German.)  There  is  no  other 
reason  for  the  use  of  should  in 

"  But  didst  thou  hear  without  wonder  how  thy  name  should  be  so 
hanged  and  carved  about  these  trees."— A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  182. 


23*  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Should  seems  to  indicate  a  false  story  in  George  Fox's  Journal  : 
"  From  this  man's  words  was  a  slander  raised  upon  us  that  the 
Quakers  should  deny  Christ,"  p.  43  (Edition  1765).  "The  priest 
of  that  church  raised  many  wicked  slanders  upon  me  :  '  That  I  rode 
upon  a  great  black  horse,  and  that  I  should  give  a  fellow  money  to 
follow  me  when  I  was  on  my  black  horse.'  " 

"  Why  should  you  think  that  I  should  woo  in  scorn  ?  " 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  122. 


329.  Would  for  will,  wish,  require.     Would,  like 

could)  ought)  (Latin*  "potui,"  "debui,")  is  frequently  used  con- 
ditionally. Hence  "I  would  be  great"  comes  to  mean,  not  "I 
wished  to  be  great,"  but  "I  wished  (subjunctive),"  i.e.  "I  should 
wish.  "  There  is,  however,  very  little  difference  between  '  '  thou 
wouldest  wish"  and  "thou  wishest,"  as  is  seen  in  the  following 

I  KlS^il'rC    S~~ 

"  Thou  wouldst  (wishest  to)  be  great, 
Art  not  without  ambition,  but  without 
The  illness  should  (that  ought  to)  attend  it  :  what  thou 

•wouldst  highly 

That  thou  wouldst  holily,  wouldst  not  play  false, 
And  yet  wouldst  wrongly  win."  —  Macbeth,  i.  5.  20. 
As  will  is  used  for  "will  have  it,"  "pretends,"  so  would  means 
"  pretended,"  "  wished  to  prove." 

"  She  that  would  'be  your  wife."  —  C.  of  E.  iv.  4.  152. 
i.e.  "  She  that  wished  to  make  out  that  she  was  your  wife." 
So      "  One  that  would  circumvent  God."—  Hamlet,  v.  i.  87. 
Applied  to  inanimate  objects,  a  "  wish  "  becomes  a  "  requirement  :" 

"I  have  brought 

Golden  opinions  from  all  sorts  of  people, 
Which  would  (require  to)  be  worn  now  in  their  newest  gloss." 

Macbeth,  i.  7.  32. 
"Words 
Which  would  (require  to)  be  howled  out  in  the  desert  air." 

16.  iv.  3.  194. 

"  And  so  he  goes  to  heaven, 
And  so  am  I  revenged.  That  would  (requires  to)  be  scann'd." 

Hamlet,  iii.  3.  75. 

"  This  would  (requires  to)  be  done  with  a  demure  abasing  of 
your  eye  sometimes.  "—  B.  E.  92. 

•  Madvig,  348.  z. 


VERBS,  AUXILIARY.  2.33 

It  is  a  natural  and  common  mistake  to  say,  "Would  is  used  for 
should,  by  Elizabethan  writers." 

Would  is  not  often  used  for  "  desire  "  with  a  noun  as  its  object  : 
"  If,  duke  of  Burgundy,  you  would  the  peace." 

Hen.  V.  v.  2.  68. 

330.  Would  often  means  "liked,"  "was  accustomed."     Com- 
pare t<t>i\ft. 

"  A  little  quiver  fellow,  and  a'  would  manage  his  piece  thus  : 
and  a'  would  about  and  about,  and  come  you  in  and  come  you  out  ; 
rah-tah-tah  would  a'  say,  bounce  would  a'  say  :  and  away  again 
would  a'  go,  and  again  would  a'  come. " — 2  Hen,  IV.  iii.  2.  200. 

"  It  (conscience)  was  wont  to  hold  me  only  while  one  would tell 
twenty."— Kick.  III.  L  4.  122. 

"  But  still  the  house  affairs  would  draw  her  hence." 

Othello,  L  3.  147. 
So,  though  more  rarely,  will  is  used  for  "is  accustomed." 

"  Sometimes  a  thousand  t wangling  instruments 
W/7/hum  about  mine  ears." — Tempest,  iii.  2.  147. 

331.  "  Would  "  not  Used  for  "  Should."     Would  seems  on  a 
superficial  view  to  be  used  for  should,  in 

"You  amaze  me;  I  would  have  thought  her  spirit  had  been 
invincible  against  all  assaults  of  affection." — M.  Ado,  ii.  3.  119. 

But  it  is  explained  by  the  following  reply  :  "  I  would have  sworn  it 
had,"  i.e.  "  I  was  ready  and  willing  to  swear."  So,  "  I  was  willing 
and  prepared  to  think  her  spirit  invincible." 

So  in  "  What  power  is  in  Agrippa, 

If  I  would  say,  '  Agrippa,  be  it  so,' 
To  make  this  good  ?"— A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  144. 
'If  I  would  say"  means  "If  I  wished,  were  disposed,  to  say." 

"Alas,  and  would  you.  take  the  letter  of  her?" — A.  W.  iii.  4.  1. 
i.e.  "  Were  you  willing,"  "  Could  you  bring  yourself  to." 

To  take  would  for  should  would  take  from  the  sense  of  the 
following  passage : 

"  For  I  mine  own  gain'd  knowledge  should  profane 
If  I  would  time  expend  with  such  a  snipe, 
But  for  my  sport  and  profit."—  Othello,  i.  3.  390. 
i.e.  "  If  I  were  willing  to  expend." 


234  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Would  probably  means  "  wish  to  "  or  "  should  like  to,"  in 

"  You  could,  for  a  need,  study  a  speech  which  I  would  set  down 
and  insert  in't,  could  you  not  ?" — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  567. 

In  "Prince.  What  wouldest  thou  think  of  me,  if  I  should  weep? 
Poins.      I  would  think  thee  a  most  princely  hypocrite." 

2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  2.  59. 

the  second  would  is  attracted  to  the  first,  and  there  is  also  a 
notion  of  determination,  and  voluntary  "making  up  one's  mind"  in 
the  reply  of  Poins. 

So  "be  triumphant"  is  equivalent  to  "triumph,"  in  which  willing- 
ness is  expressed,  in 

"  Think  you,  but  that  I  know  our  state  secure, 
I  would  be  so  triumphant  as  I  am?" — Rich.  III.  in.  2.  84. 

i.e.  "  think  you  I  would  triumph  as  I  do  ?  " 

In  "  I  would  be  sorry,  sir,  but  the  fool  should  be  as  oft  with  your 

master  as  with  my  mistress," —  T.  N.  iii.  I.  44. 
it  must  be  confessed  there  seems  little  reason  for  would.     Inasmuch, 
however,  as  the  fool  is  speaking  of  something  that  depends  upon 
himself,  i.e.  his  presence  at  the  Count's  court,  it  may  perhaps  be 
explained  as  "I  would  not  willingly  do  anything  to  prevent,"  &c., 
just  as  we  can  say  "I  would  be  loth  to  offend  him,"  in  confusion 
between    "I  should  be   loth  to  offend   him"   and    "I  would  not 
willingly,  or  I  would  rather  not,  offend  him." 
In  "  And  how  unwillingly  I  left  the  ring, 

When  nought  would  be  accepted  but  the  ring," 

M.  of  V.  v.  I.  197. 

there  seems,  as  in  our  modern  "  nothing  would  content  him  but," 
some  confusion  between  "he  would  accept  nothing"  and  "nothing 
could  make  itself  acceptable." 


VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF. 
332.  Verbs :  Indicative  Present,  old  forms  of  the  Third 

Person  Plural.  There  were  three  forms  of  the  plural  in  Early 
English — the  Northern  in  es,  the  Midland  in  en,  the  Southern  in  eth  : 
"they  hop-<?j,"  "they  hop-«f«,"  "theyhop-^."  The  two  former 
forms  (the  last  in  the  verbs  "  doth,"  "  hath,"  and  possibly  in  others) 
are  found  in  Shakespeare.  Sometimes  they  are  used  for  the  sake 
of  the  rhyme  ;  sometimes  that  explanation  is  insufficient : 


VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF.  235 

£f>.—"  Where,  when  men  be-en,  there's  seldom  ease." 

Pericles,  ii.  Gower,  28. 
"  O  friar,  these  are  faults  that  are  not  seen, 

Ours  open  and  of  worst  example  be-fn. " — B.  J.  S  S/i.  i.  2. 
"  All  perish^  of  men  of  pelf. 

Ne  aught  escap<r»  but  himself." — Pericles,  ii.  Gower,  36. 
"  As  fresh  as  bin  the  flowers  in  May."— PEELE. 
"  Words  fearew  (terrify)  babes." — SPENS.  F.  Q. 
"And  then  the  whole  quire  hold  their  hips  and  laugh, 

And  waxen  in  their  mirth." — M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  56. 
This  form  is  rarely  used  by  Shakespeare,  and  only  archaically. 
As  an  archaic  form  it  is  selected  for  constant  use  by  Spenser. 

333.  Third  person  plural  in  -S.  This  form  is  extremely 
common  in  the  Folio.  It  is  generally  altered  by  modern  editors,  so 
that  its  commonness  has  not  been  duly  recognized.  Fortunately, 
there  are  some  passages  where  the  rhyme  or  metre  has  made  altera- 
tion impossible.  In  some  cases  the  subject-noun  may  be  con- 
sidered as  singular  in  thought,  e.g.  "  manners, "  &c.  In  other  cases 
the  quasi-singular  verb  precedes  the  plural  object ;  and  again,  in 
others  the  verb  has  for  its  nominative  two  singular  nouns  or  an 
antecedent  to  a  plural  noun  (see  247).  But  though  such  instances 
are  not  of  equal  value  with  an  instance  like  "his  tears  runs  down," 
yet  they  indicate  a  general  predilection  for  the  inflection  in  -s  which 
may  well  have  arisen  from  the  northern  E.  E.  third  person  plural 
in  -s. 

"The  venom  clamours  of  a  jealous  woman 
Poisons  more  deadly  than  a  mad  dog's  tooth." 

C.  ofE.  v.  i.  69. 

"  The  great  man  down,  you  mark  his  favouritesyf&r, 
The  poor  advanced  makes  friends  of  enemies." 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  214-5. 

Here  the  Globe  reads  "favourite;"  completely  missing,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  the  intention  to  describe  the  crowd  of  favourites  scattering  in 
flight  from  the  fallen  patron. 

"The  extreme  parts  of  time  extremely  forms 

All  causes  to  the  purpose  of  his  will/'— L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  750. 
"Manners"  is,  perhaps,  used  as  a  singular  in 

"  What  manners  is  in  this  ?" — R.  and  J.  v.  3.  214. 
"Which  very  manners  urges." — Lear,  v.  3.  234. 
So        "  Whose  church-like  humours  fits  not  for  a  crown." 

2  Hen.   VI.  i.  I.  247. 


236  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR, 

"  Riches"  may,  perhaps,  be  considered  a  singular  noun  (as  it  is  by 
derivation,  "  richesse  ")  in 

"The  riches  of  the  ship  is  come  ashore."— Othello,  ii.  I.  83. 
But  not 

"  My  old  bones  aches"  (Globe,  ache). — Tempest,  iii.  2.  2. 

"  His  tears  runs  down  his  beard  like  winter-drops"  (Globe,  run}. 

Ib.  v.  I.  16. 
"  We  poor  unfledg'd 

Have  never  wing*d  from  view  o'  the  nest,  nor  knows  not 
What  air's  from  home"  (Globe,  know).—Cymb.  iii.  3.  27. 

"  And  worthier  than  himself 
Here  tends  (Globe  and  Quarto,  tend)  the  savage  strangeness  he 

puts  on, 
Disguise  the  holy  strength  of  their  command,"  &c. 

Tt.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  135. 
"  These  naughty  times 
Puts  (Globe,  put)  bars  between  the  owners  and  their  rights. " 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  19. 

"  These  high  wild  hills  and  rough  uneven  ways 
Draws  out  our  miles,  and  makes  them  wearisome. " 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  5. 
"Not  for  all  the  sun  sees,  or 
The  close  earth  wombs,  or  the  profound  seas  hides.1" 

(Globe,  sea.)—  W.   T.  iv.  4.  501. 
"  The  imperious  seas  breeds  monsters"  (Globe,  breed). 

Cymb.  iv.  2.  35. 

"  Untimely  storms  makes  men  expect  a  dearth  "  (Globe,  make). 

Rich.  III.  ii.  3.  33. 

Numbers,  perhaps,  sometimes  stand  on  a  different  footing  : 

"Eight  yards  of  uneven  ground  is  three  score   and  ten  miles 
afoot  with  me." — I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  2.  28. 
i.e.  "A  distance  of  eight  yards ;"  and  compare 

"  Three  parts  of  him  is  ours  already."—^  C.  i.  3.  154. 

"  Two  of  both  kinds  makes  up  four."— M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  438. 
But  no  such  explanation  avails  in 

"  She  lifts  the  coffer-lids  that  close  his  eyes, 
Where,  lo  !  two  lamps  burnt  out  in  darkness  lies." 

V.  and  A.  1128. 
"  Whose  own  hard  dealings  teaches  them  suspect 

The  deeds  of  others."—  M.  ofV.  i.  3.  163. 
"  Those  pretty  wrongs  that  liberty  commits 
.  Thy  beauty  and  thy  years  full  well  befits." —Sonn.  41. 


VERBS,   INFLECTIONS  OF.  237 

There  is  some  confusion  in 

"  Fortune's  blows 

When  most  struck  home,  being  gentle  wounded  craves 
A  noble  cunning." — Coriol.  iv.  4.  8. 

On  the  whole,  it  is  probable  that  though  Shakespeare  intended  to 
make  "blows  "  the  subject  of  "  craves,"  he  afterwards  introduced  a 
new  subject,  "being  gentle,"  and  therefore  "blows"  must  be  con- 
sidered nominative  absolute  and  "when"  redundant: "  Fortune's  blows 
(hcing)  struck  home,  to  be  gentle  then  requires  a  noble  wisdom." 

"  Words  to  the  heat  of  deeds  too  cold  breath  gives" 

Macbeth,  ii.  I.  61. 
in  a  rhyming  passage. 

It  is  perhaps  intended  to  be  a  sign  of  low  breeding  and  harsh 
writing  in  the  play  of  Pyramus  and  Thisbe. 

"Thisbe,  the  flowers  of  odours  savours  sweet." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  I.  84. 

334.  Third  person  plural  in  -th. 

"Those  that  through  renowne  hath  ennobled  their  life." 

MONTAIGNE,  32. 
See,  however,  Relative,  247. 

"Their  encounters,  though  not  personal,  hath  been  royally 
encountered"  (Globe,  have}.  — IV.  T.'\.  I.  29. 

"  Where  men  enforced  doth  speak  anything." — M.  ofV.  iii.  2.  33. 

"Hath  all  his  ventures  fail'd  ?"  (Globe,  have.}—Ib.  iii.  2.  270. 
This,  however,  is  a  case  when  the  verb  precedes  the  subject.     (See 
below,  335.) 

335.  Inflection  in  -s  preceding  a  plural  subject.    Passages 

in  which  the  quasi-singular  verb  precedes  the  plural  subject  stand 
on  a  somewhat  different  footing.  When  the  subject  is  as  yet  future 
and,  as  it  were,  unsettled,  the  third  person  singular  might  be  regarded 
as  the  normal  inflection.  Such  passages  are  very  common,  parti- 
cularly in  the  case  of  "  There  is,"  as — 

"There  is  no  more  such  masters." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  371. 
"  There  was  at  the  beginning  certaine  light  suspitions  and  accu- 
sations put  up  against  him." — N.  P.  173. 

"  Of  enjoin'd  penitents  there'j  four  or  five." — A.   IV.  iii.  5.  98. 
"The  spirit  upon  whose  weal  depends  and  rests 
The  lives  of  many." — Hamlet,  iii.  3.  14. 


238  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Then  what  intends  these  forces  them  dost  bring?" 

2  Hen.  VI.  v.  i.  60. 

"  There  is  no  woman's  sides  can,"  &c. — T.  N.  ii.  4.  96. 
"Is  there  not  charms?" — Othello,  i.  I.  172. 
"Is  all  things  well?"— 2  Hen.  VL  iii.  2.  11. 
"  Is  there  not  wars?    Is  there  not  employment  ?" 

2  Hen.  2V.  i.   2.  85. 

So  I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  123 ;  ^.  0«^  y.  i.  I.  48  ;  2  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2. 
199  ;  I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  9. 

"  Here  comes  the  townsmen." — 2  /&#.  VI.  ii.  i.  68. 
"  Here  comes  the  gardeners  "  (Globe,  come). — Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  24. 
"There  comes  no  swaggerers  here." — 2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  83. 
This,  it  is  true,  comes  from  Mrs.  Quickly,  but  the  following  are 
from  Posthumus  and  Valentine  : 

"How  comes  these  staggers  on  me?" — Cymb.  v.  5.  233. 

"  Far  behind  his  worth 

Comes  all  the  praises  that  I  now  bestow." — T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  4.  72. 
And  in  the  LoveSs  Complaint,  where  the  rhyme  makes  alteration 
impossible  : 

"  And  to  their  audit  comes 

Their  distract  parcels  in  combined  sums." — L.  C.  230. 
"  What  cares  these  roarers  for  the  name  of  king?" — Temp.  i.  1. 17. 

"  There  grows  all  herbs  fit  to  cool  looser  flames." 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  i.  I. 

"There  was  the  first  gentlemanlike  tears  that  ever  we  shed." 

W.  T.  v.  2.  155. 

" Has  his  daughters  brought  him  to  this  pass  ?"  (Globe,  have.} 

Lear,  iii.  4.  65. 

"  What  means  your  graces?"  (Globe,  mean.} — Ib.  iii.  7.  30. 

' '  But  most  miserable 

Is  the  desires  that'j  (247)  glorious"  (Globe,  desire}. — Cymb.  i.  6.  6. 
("  Few"  and  "more"  might,  perhaps,  be  considered  nouns  in 
"Here'*  a  few  flowers." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  283. 
"  There  is  no  more  such  masters." — Ib.  iv.  2.  371. 
A  sum  of  money  also  can  be  considered  as  a  singular  noun  : 

"  For  thy  three  thousand  ducats  here  is  six."— M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  84.) 

"  There  lies 

Two  kinsmen  (who)  digged  their  graves  with  weeping  eyes. " 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  168. 


VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF.  239 

"  Sir,  there  lies  such  secrets  in  this  fardell  and  box." 

IV.  T.  iv.  4.  783. 
"  At  this  hour 
Lies  at  my  mercy  all  mine  enemies"  (Globe,  He). 

Tempest,  iv.  I.  264. 

336.  Inflection  in  "s"  with  two  singular  nouns   as 
subject. 

The  inflection  in  s  is  of  frequent  occurrence  also  when  two  or 
more  singular  nouns  precede  the  verb  : 

"  The  heaviness  and  guilt  within  my  bosom 
Takes  off  my  manhood." — Cytnb.  iv.  2.  2. 
"  Faith  and  troth  bids  them."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  5.  170. 
"Plenty  and  peace  breeds  cowards." — Cymb.  iii.  5.  21. 
"For women's  fear  and  love  holds  quantity." — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  177. 
"  Where  death  and  danger  dogs  the  heels  of  worth." 

A.  W.  iii.  4.  16. 

"  Scorn  and  derision  never  comes  (Globe  and  Quarto,  come}  in 
tears."— M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  123. 

"Thy  weal  and  woe  are  both  of  them  extremes, 

Despair  and  hope  makes  thee  ridiculous." — V.  and  A.  988. 
"  My  hand  and  ring  is  yours." — Cymb.  ii.  4.  57. 
"  O,  Cymbeline,  heaven  and  my  conscience  knows" 

Ib.  iii.  3.  99. 

"  Hanging  and  wiving  goes  by  destiny." — M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  83. 
4 '  The  which  my  love  and  some  necessity 
Now  lays  upon  you." — M.  of  V.  iii.  4.  34. 

337.  Apparent  cases  of  the  inflection  in  "s." 

Often,  however,  a  verb  preceded  by  a  plural  noun  (the  apparent 
nominative)  has  for  its  real  nominative,  not  the  noun,  but  the  noun 
clause. 

"The  combatants  being  kin 

Half  stints  their  strife  before  they  do  begin." — Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  5.  93. 

i.e.  "The  fact  that  the  combatants  are  kin." 

"Wherein  his  brains  still  beating  puts  him  thus 
From  fashion  of  himself." — Hamlet,  iii.  i.  182. 

i.e.  "  The  beating  of  his  brains  on  this." 

"And  our  ills  told  us 
Is  as  our  earing." — A.  and  C.  i.  2.  115. 

i.e.  "The  telling  us  of  our  faults  is  like  ploughing  us." 


240  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  And  great  affections  wrestling  in  thy  bosom 

Doth  make  an  earthquake  of  nobility." — K.  J.  v.  2.  42. 
"  To  know  our  enemies'  minds  we  'Id  rip  their  hearts  : 

(To  rip)  Their  papers  is  more  lawful.  "—Lear,  iv.  6.  266. 
So  in  "Blest  be  those, 

How  mean  soe'er,  that  have  their  honest  wills, 

Which  seasons  comfort," — Cymb.  i.  6.  8. 

"which"  has  for  its  antecedent  "having  one's  honest  will." 

Conversely,  a  plural  is  implied,  and  hence  the  verb  is  in  the 
plural,  in 

"  Men's  flesh  preserv'd  so  whole  do  seldom  win." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  301. 

i.e.  "  when  men  are  too  careful  about  their  safety  they  seldom  win." 

"  Smile  heaven  (the  gods,  or  the  stars)  upon  this  fair  conjunction, 

That  long  have  frowned  upon  their  enmity." — Rich.  III.  v.  5.  21. 

It  may  be  conjectured  that  this  licence,  as  well  as  the  licence 
of  using  the  -s  inflection  where  the  verb  precedes,  or  where  the 
noun  clause  may  be  considered  the  nominative,  would  in  all  proba- 
bility not  have  been  tolerated  but  for  the  fact  that  -s  was  still 
recognized  as  a  provincial  plural  inflection. 
The  following  is  simply  a  case  of  transposition  : 
"Now,  sir,  the  sound  that  tells  what  hour  it  is 
A  re  clamorous  groans." — Rich.  II.  v.  5.  56. 

338.  S  final  misprinted.  Though  the  rhyme  and  metre 
establish  the  fact  that  Shakespeare  used  the  plural  verbal  inflection 
in  j,  yet  it  ought  to  be  stated  that-j  final  in  the  Folio  is  often  a 
misprint.  Being  indicated  by  a  mere  line  at  the  end  of  a  word  in 
MS.,  it  was  often  confused  with  the  comma,  full  stop,  dash  or  hyphen. 

"  Comes  (,)  shall  we  in  ?"—  T.  of  A.  i.  i.  284. 

"At  that  that  I  have  kil'd  my  lord,  a  Flys."—T.  A.  iii.  2.  53. 

"  Good  man,  these  joyful  tears  show  thy  true  hearts" 

Hen.  VIII.  v.  3.  175. 

Conversely,  in  one  or  two  places  the  dash  or  hyphen  has  usurped  the 
place  of  the  s. 

"  Unkle,  what  newe—  ?"—  I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  30. 
"  With  gobbets  of  thy  Mother-bleeding  heart. " 

2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  85. 

Sometimes  (even  without  the  possibility  of  mistake  for  a  comma) 
the  -j  is  inserted  : 


VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF.  241 

"  Sir  Protheus,  your  Fathers  call's  for  you." —  T.G.ofV.  i.  3. 88. 

"  Sawcie  Lictors 

Will  catch  at  us  like  Strumpets,  and  scald  Rimers 
Ballads  us  out  of  tune." — A.  and  C.  v.  2.  216. 

Yet  in  many  passages  the  -s  is  probably  correct,  though  we  should 
now  omit  it,  especially  at  the  end  of  nouns.  As  we  still  use 
"riches,"  "gains,"  almost  as  singular  nouns,  so  Shakespeare  seems 
to  have  used  "lands,"  "wars,"  "stones,"  "sorrows,"  "flatteries," 
"purposes,"  "virtues,"  "glories,"  "fortunes,"  "things,"  "at- 
tempts," "graces,"  "treasons,"  "succours,"  "behaviours," 
"duties,"  "funerals,"  "  proceedings,"  &c.  as  collective  nouns. 

In  other  cases  there  seems  at  least  a  method  in  the  error.  The  -s 
is  added  to  plural  adjectives  and  to  adjectives  or  nouns  dependent 
upon  nouns  inflected  in  "j,"  as 

"  The  letters  patents"— Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  202  (Folio). 
It  is  common  in  E.  E.  for  plural  adjectives  of  Romance  origin 
to   take   the   plural    inflection.      But  see  430.      The  Globe  reads 
"patents"  in  Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  130. 
The  following  are  selected,  without  verification,  from  Walker  : 

"Kings  Richards  throne." — Rich.  II.  i.  3. 

"Smooth  and  welcomes  newes." — i- Hen.  IV.  L  I. 

"Lords  Staffords  death." — Ib.  v.  3. 

"The  Thicks-lips."— Othello,  i.  i. 

A  word  already  plural  sometimes  receives  an  additional  plural 
inflection  : 

"Your /«/£«."— J.  C.  v.  i. 

"  Others  faults."— \  Hen.  IV.  v.  2. 

"Men  look'd  .  .  .  each  at  others." — Coriol.  v.  5. 

"  Boths." — T.  A.  ii.  4.      "  On  others  grounds." — Othello,  i.  i. 

339.  Past  indicative  forms  in  U  are  very  common  in  Shake- 
speare. Thus,  "sang"  does  not  occur,  while  " sung "  is  common 
as  a  past  indicative.  "  Sprang  "  is  less  common  as  a  past  tense  than 
"sprung"  (2  Hen.  IV.  i.  i.  111).  "Begun"  (Hamlet,  Hi.  2.  220) 
is  not  uncommon  for  "  began,"  which  is  also  used.  We  also  find 
"  I  drunk  him  to  his  bed."— A.  and  C.  i.  5.  21. 

Past  indicative  tenses  in  u  were  common  in  the  seventeenth 
century,  but  the  irregularity  dates  from  the  regular  Early  English 
idiom, 

R 


242  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

In  A.-S.  the  second  person  singular,  and  the  three  plural  persons 
of  some  verbs,  e.g.  "singan,"  had  the  same  vowel  u,  while  the  first 
and  third  persons  singular  had  a.  Hence,  though  the  distinction 
was  observed  pretty  regularly  in  E.  E.,  yet  gradually  the  u  and  a 
were  used  indiscriminately  in  the  past  tense  without  distinction  of 
person. 

340.  Second  Person  Singular  in  -ts.    In  verbs  ending  with 

-/,  -test  final  in  the  second  person  sing,  often  becomes  -ts  for  euphony. 
Thus:  "Thou  torments"  Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  270  (Folio);  "Thou 
requests,"  Rich.  III.  ii.  I.  98  (Folio);  "revisits,"  Hamlet,  i.  4.  53; 
"splits,"  M.  for  M.  ii.  2.  115;  "exists,"  Ib.  iii.  I.  20  (Folio); 
"solicites"  Cymb.  i.  6.  147  (Folio);  "re/Us,"  Cymb.  iii.  3.  103 
(Folio).  "Thouyfe/j,"  Sonn.  19;  this  is  marked  in 
"  What  art  thou  call'j/  .  .  .  and  affright?" 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iv.  i. 

This  termination  in  -s  contains  perhaps  a  trace  of  the  influence  of 
the  northern  inflection  in  -s  for  the  second  pers.  sing. 

341.  Past  Indicative:    -t  for  -ted.     In  verbs  in  which  the 
infinitive  ends   in  -/,  -ed  is  often  omitted  in  the  past  indicative  for 
euphony. 

"  \fast  and  prayed  for  their  intelligence." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  347 
"There  they  hoist  us." — Tempest,  i.  2.  147. 
"  Plunged  in  the  foaming  brine  and  quit  the  vessel." — Ib.  211. 
"  When  service  sweat  for  duty,  not  for  meed." — A.  KZ.ii.3.58. 
"  Stood  Dido  .  .  .  and  waft  her  love 

To  come  again  to  Carthage." — M.  of  V.  v.  I.  10. 
Compare  Hen.  VIII.  ii.  I.  33  ;  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  205. 
We  find  "bid"  for  "bided,"  i.e.  "endured,"  in 

"  Endured  of  (by)  her  for  whom  you  bid  like  sorrow." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  304. 

This  is,  of  course,  as  natural  as  "chid,"  "rid,"  &c.,  which  are 
recognized  forms.  On  the  other  hand,  the  termination  in  ~ed  is  some- 
times used  for  a  stronger  form  : 

"  I  shaked."—  Tempest,  ii.  I.  319. 

342.  Participle :  -ed  omitted  after  d  and  t.    Some  verbs 
ending  in  -tc,  -/,  and  ~d,  on  account  of  their  already  resembling  parti- 


VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF.  243 

ciples  in  their  terminations,  do  not  add  -td  in  the  participle.  The 
same  rule,  naturally  dictated  by  euphony,  is  found  in  E.  E.  "If  the 
root  of  a  verb  end  in  -d  or  -t  doubled  or  preceded  by  another  con- 
sonant, the  -de  or  -te  of  the  past  tense,  and  -d  or  -t  of  the  past  par- 
ticiple, are  omitted."*  Thus — 

Acquit. — "  Well  hast  thou  acquit  thee."— Rich.  III.  v.  5.  8. 
Addict. — Mirror  for  Magistrates  (NARES). 

Articulate. — "These  things  indeed  you  have  articulate." 

\  Hen.  IV.  v.  i.  72. 
Betid. — Tempest,  i.  2.  31. 

Bloated). — "Let  the  bloat king  tempt  you."—ffamlet,  iii.  4.  182. 
Contract. — "  He  was  contract  to  lady  Lucy." — Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  179. 
Degenerate.  —  '-''  They  have  degenerate." — B.  E.  38. 

Deject. — "  And  I  of  ladies  most  deject  and  wretched." 

Hamlet,  iii.  I.  163. 
Devote.  — T.  of  Sh.  \.  I.  32. 

Disjoint  for  disjointed.  — Hamlet,  i.  2.  20. 

Enshield. — "  An  enshield  beauty." — M.  for  M.  ii.  4.  80. 

Exhaust. — "Their  means  are  less  exhaust." '-- «-B.  E.  16. 

Graft. — "Her  noble  stock  graft  with  ignoble  plants." 

Rich.  HI.  iii.  7.  127. 

Compare  "An  ingraft  infirmity." — Othello,  ii.  3.  144. 
Heat.— "The  iron  of  itself,  though  heat  red-hot."— K.  J.  iv.  I.  61. 
Hoist. — "  For  'tis  the  sport  to  have  the  enginer 

Hoist  with  his  own  petard. " — Hamlet,  iii.  4.  207. 

Infect. — "  Many  are  infect." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  188. 
Quit. — "The  very  rats  instinctively  have  qiiit  it." — Temp.  i.  2.  147. 
Suffocate. — "  Degree  is  suffocate." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  125. 
Taint. — "  Unspotted  heart  never  yet  taint  with  love." 

I  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  183. 
Wed.— Hen.  VIII.  ii.  i.  141. 

Waft.  "  A  braver  choice  of  dauntless  spirits 

Than  now  the  English  bottoms  have  -waft  o'er." — K.  J.\\.  I.  73. 
Wet.-Rich.  III.  i.  2.  216. 

Whist  (for  "  whisted,"  which  is  used  by  Surrey  in  the  indicative). 
"  The  wild  waves  whist." — Tempest,  i.  2.  379. 

*  Morris,  Specimens  of  Early  English,  xxxv. 
R2 


244  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

i.  e.  ' « being  whisted  or  made  silent. "     So,  in  imitation, 
"  The  winds,  with  wonder  -whist, 
Smoothly  the  waters  kist."— MILTON,  Hymn  on  the  Nativity. 

Words  like  "miscreate,"  Hen.  V.  i.  2.  16;  "create,"  M.  N.  D. 
v.  i.  412,  "consecrate,"  Ib.  422,  being  directly  derived  from  Latin 
participles,  stand  on  a  different  footing,  and  may  themselves  be 
regarded  as  participial  adjectives,  without  the  addition  of  d. 

343.  Participles,  Formation  Of.  Owing  to  the  tendency  to 
drop  the  inflection  en,  the  Elizabethan  authors  frequently  used  the 
curtailed  forms  of  past  participles  which  are  common  in  Early 
English  :  "I  have  spoke,  forgot,  writ,  chid,"  he. 

"  Have  you  chose  this  man  ?  " — Corioi.  ii.  3.  163. 
Where,  however,  the  form  thus  curtailed  was  in  danger  of  being 
confused  with  the  infinitive,  as  in  "taken,"  they  used  the  past  tense 
for  the  participle  : 

Arose. — "  And  thereupon  these  errors  are  arose." — C.  of  E.  v.  I.  388. 
Drove  for  driven.— 2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  84. 

Eat.— "Thou  .  .  .  hast  eat  thy  bearer  up."— 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  5.  165 ; 

M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  196. 

Froze  for  frozen.  — C.  of  E.  v.  i.  313  ;  2  Hen.  IV.  i.  i.  199. 
Holp.— "We  were  .  .  .  kolp  hither. "—  Temp.  i.  2.  63. 
(In  this  case,  however,  the  en  is  merely  dropped. ) 
Took. — "  Where  I  have  took  them  up." — J.  C.  ii.  i.  50. 
Mistook. — "  Then,  Brutus,  I  have  much  mistook  your  passion." 

Ib.  i  2.  48. 

Rode  for  ridden.— 2  Hen.  IV.  v.  3.  98;  Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  2. 
Smit  for  smitten.— T.  of  A.  ii.  I.  123. 
Smote  for  smitten.— Corioi.  iii.  I.  319. 
Strove  for  striven. — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  30. 
Writ.— Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  14. 

Wrote  tvt  written.— Lear,  \.  2.  93;  Cymb.  iii.  5.  21. 
Or  sometimes  the  form  in  ed : 

"  O,  when  degree  is  shaked." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  101. 
So  Hen.  V.  ii.  i.  124  ;   Temp.  ii.  I.  39  ;  I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  17.     But 
shook  for  shaken  is  also  common. 

"The  \\indi-shaked surge." — Othello,  ii.  I.  13. 


VERBS,  INFLECTIONS  OF.  245 

"  Ope"  in  "The  gates  are  ope"  Coriol  i.  4.  43,  seems  to  be  the 
adjective  "open"  without  the  -«,  and  not  a  verb. 

344.  Irregular  participial  formations.    The  following  are 

irregular  : — 

"You  have  swam" — A.  Y.  L.  iv.  i.  38. 
"I  have  spake."— Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  153. 
" Misbecomed."— L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  778. 
"Beeomed." — Cymb.  v.  5.  406. 

"Which  thou  hast  perpendicularly  _/£//." — Lear,  iv.  6.  54. 
"We  had  droven  them  home." — A.  and  C.  iv.  7.  5. 
"Sawn'"  for  "  seen"  is  found  as  a  rhyme  to  "drawn,"  L.  C.  91. 

"  Strucken."— C.  of  E.  i.  I.  46  ;  L.  L.  L.  iv.  3.  224  ;  J.  C. 

iii.  i.  209. 
"  When  they  are/retten  with  the  gusts  of  heaven." 

M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  77. 

"Sweeten." — Macbeth,  iv.  I.  65.     (So  Quartos.) 
Caught  seems  to  be  distinguished  as  an  adjective  from  the  participle 
catch'd  in 

"  None  are  so  surely  caught  when  they  are  catch' d 

As  wit  turned  fool. " — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  69. 
The  following  are  unusual : — 

"Splitted."—  C.  ofE.  i.  i.  105,  v.  i.  308  ;  A.  and  C.  v.  i.  24. 
' '  Seated. " — Sonn.  62. 
The  following  are  archaic  : — 

"  Marcus,  unknit  that  sorrow-wreathen  knot." — T.  A.  iii.  2.  4. 
"Foughten."—  Hen.  V.  iv.  6.  18. 

345.  The  participial  prefix  y-  is  only  two  or  three  times  used 
in   Shakespeare's   plays:    "y-clept,"    "y-clad,"    "y-slaked."      In 
E.  E.  y-  is  prefixed  to  other  forms  of  speech  beside  participles,  like 
the  German  ge-.     But  in   Elizabethan  English  the  y-   was  wholly 
disused   except   as   a  participial   prefix,   and   even   the   latter  was 
archaic.     Hence  we  must  explain  as  follows  : 

"  The  sum  of  this 
Brought  hither  to  Pentapolis 

Yravished  \\\z  regions  round." — P.  of  T.  iii.  Gower,  35. 

Shakespeare  was  probably  going  to  write  (as  in  the  same  speech, 

line   I,    "  y  slaked  hath")   " yravishcd  the    regions   hath,"  but   the 

necessity  of  the  rhyme,  and  the  diminished  sense  of  the  grammatical 

force  of  the  participial  prefix,  made   him   alter   the   construction. 


SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

is  used  by  Sackville  before  a  present  participle,  "y- causing. " 
In  M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  68,  and  elsewhere,  we  find  "  I  wiss  "  apparently 
for  the  old  "  y-wiss." 

VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES. 

346.  Indicative  simple  present  for  complete  present 
with  adverbs  signifying  "  as  yet,"  &c. 

This  is  in  accordant^  with  the  Latin  idiom,  "jampridem  opto," 
&c.,  and  it  is  explicable  on  the  ground  that,  when  an  action  con- 
tinued up  to  the  present  time  is  still  continuing,  the  speaker  may 
prefer  the  verb  to  dwell  simply  on  the  fact  that  the  action  is  present, 
allowing  the  adverb  to  express  the  past  continuousness  : 
"  That's  the  worst  tidings  that  I  hear  of  yet." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  i.  127. 
"How  does  your  honour  for  this  many  a  day?" — Hamlet,  iii.  I.  91. 

347.  Simple  past  for  complete  present  with  "  since,"  &c. 

This  is  in  accordance  with  the  Greek  use  of  the  aorist,  and  it  is 
as  logical  as  our  more  modern  use.     The  difference  depends  upon 
a  difference  of  thought,  the  action  being  regarded  simply  as  past 
without  reference  to  the  present  or  to  completion. 
"  I  saw  him  not  these  many  years,  and  yet 

I  know  'tis  he."—  Cymb.  iv.  2.  66. 

"I  saw  not  better  sport  these  seven  years'  day." — 2  Hen.  VI. 
ii.  I.  3. 

"Since  death  of  my  dear'st  mother 
It  did  not  speak  before.  "—Cymb.  iv.  2.  190. 
"  I  didnoi  see  him  since." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  1. 
"  I  was  not  angry  since  I  came  in  France 
Until  this  instant." — Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  58. 

"I  can  tell  you  strange  news  that  you  yet  dreamed  not  of." — 
M.  Ado,  i.  2.  4. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  above  examples  all  contain  a  negative. 
The  indefinite  tense  seems  to  have  peculiar  propriety  when  we  are 
denying  that  an  action  was  performed  at  any  time  whatever.  Hence 
the  contrast : 

"Judges  and  senates  have  been  bought  with  gold, 
Esteem  and  love  were  never  to  be  sold. " 

POPE,  Essay  on  Man,  iv.  187. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  247 

But  we  have  also,  without  a  negative, 

"  And  since  I  saw  thee, 
The  affliction  of  my  mind  amends." — Tempest,  v.  I.  114. 

The  simple  present  is  in  the  following  example  incorrectly  com- 
bined with  the  complete  present.     But  the  two  verbs  are  so  far 
apart  that  they  may  almost  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  different 
sentences,  especially  as  "but"  may  be  regarded  as  semi-adversative, 
"And  never  since  the  middle  summer's  spring 
Met  we  .  .  .  but  .  .  .  thou  hast  disturbed  our  sport." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  83-7. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  complete  present  is  used  remarkably  in — 
««  D.  Pedro.   Runs  not  this  speech  like  iron  through  your  blood  ? 
Claud.   I  have  drunk  poison  whiles  he  utter'd  it." 

M.  Ado,  v.  i.  253. 

This  can  only  be  explained  by  a  slight  change  of  thought  :  "  I 
have  drunk  poison  (and  drunk  [339]  poison  all  the)  while  he  spoke." 

348.  Future  for  Subjunctive  and  Infinitive.    The  future  is 

often  used  where  we  should  use  the  infinitive  or  subjunctive. 

A  comparison  of  Wickliffe  with  the  versions  of  the  sixteenth  cen- 
tury would  show  that  in  many  cases  the  Early  English  subjunctive 
had  been  replaced  by  the  Elizabethan  "shall." 

"  And  I  will  sing  that  they  shall  hear  I  am  not  afraid." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  i.  126. 
"That  you  shall  surely  find  him 

Lead  to  the  Sagittary  the  raised  search."— Othello^  i.  1. 158. 
"That  thou  shalt  see  the  difference  of  our  spirits, 

I  pardon  thee  thy  life  before  thou  ask  it." — M.ofV.  iv.  I.  368. 
"Therefore  in  fierce  tempest  is  he  coming 

That,  if  requiring  fail,  he  will  compel." — Hen.  V.\\.^,.  101. 

Here,  however  (283),  "so  "  maybe  omitted  before  "that,"  i.e.  "so 
that  he  purposes  compulsion  if  fair  means  fail." 

"  Reason  with  the  fellow, 
Lest  you  shall  chance  to  whip  your  information. " 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  53. 
"If  thou  refuse  and  wilt  encounter  with  my  wrath." 

W.  T.  ii.  3.  138. 
"  The  constable  desires  thee  tJwu  wilt  mind 

Thy  followers  of  repentance." — Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  84. 
"  Will  you  permit  that  I  shall  stand  condemn'd  ?" 

Rich.  //.  ii.  3.  119. 


248  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So  with  "for"  used  for  "because"  (117)  in  the  sense  of   "in 
order  that." 

"  And,  for  the  time  shall  not  seem  tedious, 

I'll  tell  thee  what  befel  me." — 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  10. 
As  in  Latin,  the  future  is  sometimes  correctly  and  logically  used 
with  reference  to  future  occurrences  ;  but  we  find  it  side  by  side  with 
the  incorrect  and  modern  idiom. 

"  Farewell  till  we  shall  meet  again." — M.  of  V.  iii.  4.  40. 
"He  that  outlives  this  day  and  conies  safe  home, 
He  that  shall  live  this  day  and  see  old  age." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  40. 

"  All  France  will  be  replete  with  mirth  and  joy, 
When  they  shall  hear  how  we  have  play'd  the  men." 

I  Hen.  VI.  \.  6.  16. 

"When  they  shall  know."— Rich.  II.  i.  4.  49. 
"  If  you  shall  see  Cordelia." — Lear,  iii.  I.  46. 
"  Till  your  strong  hand  shall  help  to  give  him  strength." 

K.  J.  ii.  I.  133. 

The  future  seems  used  (perhaps  with  reference  to  the  original 
meaning  of  "shall ")  to  signify  necessary  and  habitual  recurrence  in 

"  Good  Lord,  what  madness  rules  in  brain-sick  men 
When  for  so  slight  and  frivolous  a  cause 
Such  factious  emulations  shall  arise." — \Hen.  VI.  iv.  1. 113. 
So    "  Men  shall  deal  unadvisedly  sometimes." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  293. 

349.  Infinitive.    "  To  "  omitted  and  inserted,    in  Early 

English  the  present  infinitive  was  represented  by-£«(A.-S.  -an),  so 
that  "to  speak"  was  "spek<?«,"  and  "he  is  able  to  speak"  was 
"  he  can  spek^w,"  which,  though  very  rare,  is  found  in  Pericles,  ii. 
Prologue,  1 2.  The  -en  in  time  became  -e,  and  the  -e  in  time  became 
mute  ;  thus  reducing  tf  sing-eft"  to  "sing."  When  the  en  dropped 
intu  disuse,  and  to  was  substituted  for  it,  several  verbs  which  we 
call  auxiliary,  and  which  are  closely  and  commonly  connected  with 
other  verbs,  retained  the  old  licence  of  omitting  to,  though  the 
infinitival  inflection  was  lost.  But  naturally,  in  the  Elizabethan 
period,  while  this  distinction  between  auxiliary  and  non-auxiliary 
verbs  was  gradually  gaining  force,  there  was  some  difference  of 
opinion  as  to  which  verbs  did,  and  which  did  not,  require  the 
"to,"  and  m  Early  English  there  is  much  inconsistency  in  this 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  249 

respect.     Thus  in  consecutive  lines  4<  ought "  is  used  without,  and 
"let"  with,  "to." 

"  And  though  we  owe  the  fall  of  Troy  requite, 
Yet  let  revenge  thereof  from  gods  to  light." 

Mirror  for  Magistrates  (quoted  by  Dr.  GUEST). 

"You  ought  not  walk."— J.  C.  i.  I.  3. 
"  Suffer  him  speak  no  more."— B.  J.  Sejan.  iii.  i. 
"  If  the  Senate  still  command  me  serve." — Ib.  iii.  I. 
"The  rest  I  wish  thee  gather."— i  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  96. 
"You  were  wont  be  civil." — Othello,  ii.  3.  190. 
"I  list  not  prophesy." — IV.  T.  iv.  i.  26. 
"  Pie  thought  have  slaine  her."— SPENS.  F.  Q.  \.  I.  50. 
"  It  forst  him  slacke."— Ib.  19. 
"  Stay  "  is  probably  a  verb  in 

"How  long  within  this  wood  intend  you  (to)  stay?" 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  138. 

"  Desire  her  (to)  call  her  wisdom  to  her." — Lear,  iv.  5.  35. 
"  As  one  near  death  to  those  that  wish  him  (to)  live." 

A.  W.  ii.  i.  134. 
"  What  might'st  thou  do  that  honour  would  (wished)  thee  (to) 

do?^— Hen.  V.  Prologue,  18. 
"That  wish'd  him  in  the  barren  mountains  (to)  starve." 

i  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  159. 

SoAf.forM.  iv.  3.  138;  M.  Ado,  iii.  i.  42.     Hence  "overlook"  is 
probably  not  the  subjunctive  (see  however  369)  but  the  infinitive  in 

"  Willing  you  (to)  overlook  this  pedigree." — Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  90. 
So  after  "  have  need  :" 

"  Thou  hadst  need  send  for  more  money." — T.  N.  ii.  3.  99. 

"Vouchsafe  me  speak  a  word." — C.  of  E.  v.  I.  282. 

"  To  come  view  fair  Portia." — M.  of  V.  ii.  7.  43. 

"We'll  come  dress  you  straight."— M.   W.  of  W.  iv.  2.  80. 

"  I  will  go  seek  the  king." — Hamlet,  ii.  I.  101. 
We  still  retain  a  dislike  to  use  the  formal  to  after  "go  "  and  "come," 
which  may  almost  be  called  auxiliaries,  and  we  therefore  say,   "I 
will  come  and  see  you. " 

We  cannot  reject  now  the  to  after  "know"  (though  after  this 
word  we  seldom  use  the  infinitive  at  all,  and  prefer  to  use  the 
conjunction  "that"),  but  Shakespeare  has 

"Knowing  thy  heart  (to)  torment  me  with  disdain."—  Sonn.  132. 


250  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

A  similar  omission  is  found  in 

"That  they  would  suffer  these  abominations 
Bv  our  strong  arms  from  forth  her  fair  streets  (to  be)  chased." 

R.  ofL.  1634. 
So        "Because,  my  lord,  we  would  have  had  you  (to  have)  heard 

The  traitor  speak."— Rich.  III.  iii.  5-  56. 

To  is  inserted  after  "let"  both  in  the  sense  of  "suffer"  and  in 
that  of  "hinder." 

"  And  let  (suffer)  no  quarrel  nor  no  brawl  to  come." 

T.  N.  v.  i.  364. 

"  If  nothing  lets  (prevents)  to  make  us  happy  both." — Ib.  256. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  is  omitted  after  "  beteem  "  in  the  sense  of 
"suffer:" 

"  He  might  not  beteem  the  winds  of  heaven 
Visit  her  face  too  roughly." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  141. 

After  "durst :" 

"  I  durst,  my  lord,  to  wager  she  is  honest." — Othello,  iv.  2.  11. 
The  to  is  often  inserted  after  verbs  of  perceiving, — "feel,"  "see," 
"hear,"&c. 

"Who  heard  me  to  deny  it?"—  C.  of.E.  v.  i.  25. 
"  Myself  have  heard  a  voice  to  call  him  so." 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  i.  94. 

' '  Whom  when  on  ground  she  grovelling  saw  to  roll. " 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  v.  7.  32. 

"Methinks  I  feel  this  youth's  perfections 
To  creep  in  at  mine  eyes."—  T.  N.  i.  5.  317. 

"  I  had  rather  hear  you  to  solicit  that." — Ib.  iii.  I.  120. 

"To  see  great  Hercules  whipping  a.  gig, 
And  profound  Solomon  to  tune  a  jig, 
And  Nestor  play  at  push-pin  with  the  boys." 

L.  L.  L.  iv.  3.  167-9. 

This  quotation  shows  that,  after  "see,"  the  infinitive,  whether 
with  or  without  "to,"  is  equivalent  to  the  participle.  "  Whipping," 
"  to  tune,"  and  "  play,"  are  all  co-ordinate.  The  participial  form  is 
the  most  correct :  as  in  Latin,  "Audivi  illam  canentem;"  modern 
English,  "I  heard  herj/w^;"  Elizabethan  English,  "I  heard  her 
to  sing."  The  infinitive  with  to  after  verbs  of  perception  occurs 
rarely,  if  ever,  in  Early  English  (Matzner  quotes  Wickliffe,  St.  John 
xii.  1 8,  but  ?).  It  seems  to  have  been  on  the  increase  towards 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  251 

the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  for  whereas  Wickliffe  (St.  Matt. 
xv.  31)  has  "The  puple  wondride  seynge  dumb  men  spekynge 
and  crokid  men  goynge,  blynde  men  seyinge,"  Tyndale  (1534)  has 
"The  people  wondred  to  se  the  domme  speak,  the  maymed 
whole,  the  halt  to  go,  and  the  blynde  to  se  ; "  and  the  A.  V. 
(1611)  has  to  throughout.  This  idiom  is  also  very  common  in 
North,  and  Florio's  "  Montaigne."  We  have  recurred  to  the  idiom 
of  Early  English. 

Compare  William  of  Palerne,  1.  871  :  "and  whan  he  seif 
bat  semly  sitte  him  bi-fore,"  i.e.  "and  when  he  saw  her  in  her 
beauty  sit  before  him."  In  this  quotation  we  might  render  "sitte  " 
by  the  participle  "sitting,"  as  the  girl  is  regarded  as  "in  the 
state  of  sitting."  This  opens  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  phrase 
"to  see  great  Hercules  -whipping."  Is  "whipping,"  by  derivation, 
a  verbal  abbreviated  for  "a-whipping,"  as  in  93,  or  a  present 
participle?  The  common  construction  after  "see"  and  "hear"  in 
Layamon  and  William  of  Palerne  seems  to  be  neither  the  participle 
nor  the  verbal,  but  the  infinitive  in  -e  or  -en.  Probably,  when  the 
infinitive  inflection  died  out,  it  was  felt  that  the  short  uninflected 
form  was  not  weighty  enough  to  express  the  emphatic  infinitive,  and 
recourse  was  had  to  the  present  participle,  a  substitution  which 
was  aided  by  the  similarity  of  the  terminations  -en  and  -ing. 
This  is  one  of  the  many  cases  in  which  the  terminations  of  the 
infinitive  and  present  participle  have  been  confused  together  (93), 
and  the  -ing  in  this  construction  represents  the  old  infinitive  in- 
flection -en.  This  may  explain  : 

"  I  my  brother  know 
Yet  living  (to  live)  in  my  glass." — T.  N.  iii.  4.  415. 

i.e.  "  that  my  brother  lives." 

Hence,  perhaps,  also  -ing  was  added  as  a  reminiscence  of  the  old 
gerundive  termination  -ene,  in  such  expressions  as 

"  Put  the  liveries  to  making." — M.  of  V.  ii.  2.  124. 

Similarly  we  find,  side  by  side,  in  Selden's  "  Table  Talk,"  "  He 
fell  to  eating"  and  he  "  fell  to  eat." 

350.  "To"  omitted  and  inserted  in  the  same  sentence. 

The  to  is  often  omitted  in  the  former  of  two  clauses  and  inserted  in 
the  latter,  particularly  when  the  finite  principal  verb  is  an  auxiliary, 
or  like  an  auxiliary. 


252  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Whether  hadst  thou  rather  be  a  Faulconbridge 

And,  like  thy  brother,  to  enjoy  thy  land."— A".  J.  i.  I.  134. 

"  I  would  no  more 

Endure  this  wooden  slavery  than  to  suffer 
The  flesh-fly  blow  my  mouth. "—  Tempest,  iii.  I.  62. 
"  Who  ivoulti  be  so  mock'cl  with  glory,  or  to  live 

But  in  a  dream  of  friendship?" — T.  of  A.  iv.  2.  33. 
So  K.  J.  v.  2.  138-9  ;  J.  C.  iv.  3.  73  ;  T.  N.  v.  I.  346. 
"  Sir,  I  desire  you  (to)  do  me  right  and  justice, 
And  to  bestow  your  pity  on  me."— ^«.  P7/7.  ii.  4-  14- 

11  Bids  you 
Deliver  up  the  crown  and  to  take  pity." — /&«.  V.  ii.  4. 104 

"  Makes  both  my  body  pine  and  soul  to  languish." 

P.  of  T.  i.  I.  31. 

"  Make  thy  two  eyes  like  stars  start  from  their  spheres, 
Thy  knotted  and  combined  locks  to  part." — Hamlet,  i.  4. 18. 

"  Brutus  had  rather  be  a  villager 
Than  to  repute  himself  a  son  of  Rome." — J.  C.  i.  2.  175. 

"  She  tells  me  she'//  wed  the  stranger  knight, 
Or  never  more  to  view  nor  day  nor  night." — P.  ofT.  ii.  5- 17. 

"  Some  pagan  shore, 

Where  these  two  Christian  armies  might  combine 
The  blood  of  malice  in  a  vein  of  league, 
And  not  to  spend  it  so  unneighbourly." — K.  J.  v.  2.  39. 

Thus  probably  we  must  explain  : 

"  And  let  them  all  encircle  him  about, 
And  fairy-like  to  pinch  the  unclean  knight. " 

M.   W.ofW.  iv.  4.  57. 

The  common  explanation  "to-pinch,"  attributes  to  Shakespeare 
an  archaism  which  is  probably  nowhere  found  in  his   works   (not 
even  in  P.  of  T.  iii.  2.  17).     See  All  to,  28. 
It  is  a  question  how  to  explain 

"  She  is  abus'd,  stol'n  from  me  and  corrupted 
By  spells  and  medicines  bought  of  mountebanks  : 
For  nature  so  preposterously  to  err, 
Being  not  deficient,  blind  or  lame  of  sense, 
Sans  witchcraft  could  not."—  Othello,  i.  3.  62. 
Here,  either  as  above,   (i)    "to  err"  depends  on   "could,"  i.e. 
"Nature  was  not  able  to  err  ;"  or  (2)  "could  not"  might  perhaps 
stand  for   "  could  not  be,"  "was  impossible,"  having  for  its  subject 
•'  Nature  to  err."  (See  354.)    In  (2)  "  for"  may  be  either  (a)  a  con- 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  253 

junction,    or  (6)  a  preposition  :    "It  was  not  possible  for   Nature 
thus  to  err."     I  prefer  (i). 

In  "  For  little  office 

The  hateful  commons  will  perform  for  us 
Except,  like  curs,  to  tear  us  all  to  pieces,"  Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  139. 

"  to  tear  "  may  be  considered  as  a  noun,  the  object  of  "  except." 

351.  It  were  best  (to).      To  is  often  omitted  after  "best"  in 
such  phrases  as   "it  were  best,"   " thou  wert  best,"  &c.     Perhaps 
there  is  in  some  of  these  cases  an  unconscious  blending  of  two  con- 
structions, the  infinitive  and  imperative,   exactly  corresponding  to 
the  Greek  olafl'  ovv  8  Spdffoi/. 

"  'Tis  best  put  finger  in  the  eye."—  T.  of  Sh.  i.  i.  78. 

"  I  were  best  not  call." — Cymb.  iii.  6.  19. 

"  'Twere  best  not  know  myself." — Macbeth,  i.  2.  73. 

"  Best  draw  my  sword." — Cymb.  iii.  6.  25. 

In  most  of  these  cases  the  speaker  is  speaking  of  himself:  but 
often  it  is  impossible,  without  the  context,  to  tell  whether  the  verb  is 
in  the  infinitive  or  imperative.  Thus  in 

"  Better  be  with  the  dead," — Macbeth,  iii.  2.  20. 
it  is  only  the  following  line, 

"  Whom  we,  to  gain  our  peace,  have  sent  to  peace," 
that  shows  that  be  is  infinitive.     When  we  now  use  this  idiom,  we 
generally  intend  the  verb  to  be  used  imperatively. 

352.  I  were  best  (to).     The  construction 

"  Thou  wert  better  gall  the  devil." — K.  J.  iv.  3.  94. 

"  / were  best  leave  him." — I  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  82. 

"  Madam,  you're  best  consider. " — Cymb.  iii.  2.  79. 
like  the  modern  construction  "if  you  please,"  (in  which  we  should 
now  say,  and  be  correct  in  saying,  that  ;'you"  is  the  subject,  though 
it  was  originally  the  object,  of  "please,")  represents  an  old  imper- 
sonal idiom  :  "Me  were  liefer,"  i.e.  "it  would  be  more  pleasant  to 
me  ;"  "  Me  were  loth  ;"  "  Him  were  better."  Very  early,  however, 
the  personal  construction  is  found  side  by  side  with  the  impersonal. 
The  change  seems  to  have  arisen  from  an  erroneous  feeling  that  "  Me 
were  better"  was  ungrammatical.  Sometimes  the  to  is  inserted  : 

"  You  were  best  to  go  to  bed."— 2  Hen.  VI.  v.  I.  196. 
"  You  were  best  to  tell  Antonio  what  he  said."— M.  of  V.  ii.  8.  33. 


254  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

353.  "To"  omitted  after  Conjunctions. 

Where  two  infinitives  are  coupled  together  by  a  conjunction,  the 
to  is  still  omitted  in  the  former,  -where  the  latter  happens  to  be  nearer 
to  the  principal  -verb,  e.g.  after  "rather  than."  "  Rather  than  see 
himself  disgraced,  he  preferred  to  die."  But  we  could  not  say 

"  Will  you  be  so  good,  scauld  knave,  as  eat  it  ?" — Hen.  V.  v.  I.  31. 

This  is  probably  to  be  explained,  like  the  above,  as  a  blending 
of  two  constructions — the  infinitive,  "Will  you  be  so  good  as  to 
eat  it  ?"  and  the  imperative,  "  Eat  it,  will  you  be  so  good  ?" 

In      "  Under  the  which  he  shall  not  choose  but  fall." 

Hamlet,  iv.  7.  66. 
"  Nay  then,  indeed  she  cannot  choose  but  hate  thee." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  289. 

"Thou  shalt  not  choose  but  go."— T.  N.  iv.  I.  61. 
the  obvious  and  grammatical  construction  is  "he  shall  not  choose 
anything  except  (to)  fall ;"  "she  cannot  choose  anything  except  (to) 
hate  thee;"  but  probably  (contrary  to  Matzner's  view,  iii.  18)  the 
explanation  of  the  omission  is,  that  Shakespeare  mentally  supplies 
"shall,"  "can,"  &c.  "He  shall  not  choose  anything  else,  but 
(shall)  fall."  This  is  supported  by 

"  Who  .  .  .  cannot  choose  but  they  must  blab." — Othello,  iv.  I.  28. 

354.  Noun  and  infinitive  used  as  subject  or  object. 

It  might  be  thought  that  this  was  a  Latinism.  But  a  somewhat 
similar  use  of  the  infinitive  with  a  noun  in  impersonal  sentences  is 
often  found  in  E.  E.  and,  though  rarely,  in  A.-S. 

"  No  wondur  is  a  lewid  man  to  ruste." — CHAUCER,  C.  T.  504. 
"  It  is  ful  fair  a  man  to  bear  him  even." — Ib.  1525. 
"It  spedith  one  ma.nf0r  to  die  for  be  puple." — WICKLIFFE,  St. 
John  xviiii.  14. 

(So  Matzner,  but  Bagster  has  "that  o  man,")  i.e.  "that  one  man 
should  die." 

"  It  is  the  lesser  fault,  modesty  finds, 
Women  to  change  their  shapes  than  men  their  minds." 

T.  G.  of  V.  v.  4.  109. 
"  As  in  an  early  spring 

We  see  the  appearing  buds  which  to  prove  fruit 
Hope  gives  not  so  much  warrant  as  despair 
That  frosts  will  bite  them."— 2  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  39. 

"  This  to  prove  true 
1  do  engage  my  life."— A  Y.  L.  v.  4.  171. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  255 

"Be  thendesir'd 
A  little  to  disquantity  your  train, 
And  the  remainder  that  shall  still  depend 
To  be  such  men  that  shall  besort  your  age." — Lear,  i.  4.  272. 

In  the  following  instance  "  brags  of"  is  used  like  "  boasts  :" 

' '  Verona  brags  of  him 
To  be  a  virtuous  and  well-govern'd  youth." — R.  and  J.  i.  5.  70. 

"  I  have  deserv'd 

All  tongues  to  talk  their  bitterest."—^  T.  iii.  2.  217. 
"  (This)  is  all  as  monstrous  to  our  human  reason 

As  my  Antigonus  to  break  his  grave." — Ib.  v.  I.  42. 
"  O  that  self-chain  about  his  neck 

Which  he  foreswore  most  monstrously  to  have" 

C.  of  E.  v.  i.  11 ;  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  337. 
Add  perhaps  "  The  duke 

Will  never  grant  this  forfeiture  to  hold" — M.  ofV.  iii.  3.  25. 

though  "forfeiture"  may  be  personified,  and  "grant"  used  like 
"  allow."  We  retain  this  use,  but  transpose  "  for  "  in  "for  to"  (see 
the  example  from  Wickliffe  above)  and  place  it  before  the  noun  or 
pronoun  : 

"  For  me  to  /«/  him  to  his  purgation  would  perhaps  plunge  him 
into  far  more  choler." — Hamlet,  iii.  2.  317. 

355.  The  Infinitive  used  as  a  Noun.  This  use  is  still  re- 
tained when  the  Infinitive  is  the  subject  of  a  verb,  as  "To  walk  is 
pleasant  ; "  but  we  should  not  now  say — 

"  What's  sweet  to  do  to  do  will  aptly  find." — L.  C.  13. 

" My  operant  powers  their  functions  leave  to  do" 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  184  ;  ib.  iii.  4.  66. 

"  Have  not  to  do  with  him." — Rich.  III.  i.  3.  292. 
So  3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  5.  2. 

"  Metaphors  far-fet  hinder  to  be  understood" — B.  J.  Disc.  757. 
Apparently  to  is  omitted  in  the  following  curious  passage  : — 

"  For  to  (to}  have  this  absolute  power  of  Dictator  they  added 
never  to  be  afraid  to  be  deposed." — N.  P.  611. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  infinitive  is  a  noun  in  the  objective  in 

"Nor  has  he  with  him  to  supply  his  life." — T.  of  A.  iv.  I.  46. 
i.e.  "the  power  of  supplying;"  or  whether  "anything"  is  under- 
stood :  "  He  has  not  anything  to  supply  his  livelihood." 


256  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  can  say  "  I  was  denied  my  rights,"  but  not 

"  I  am  denied  to  sue  my  livery  here." — Rich.  III.  ii.  3.  129. 

356.  Infinitive,  indefinitely  used.  To  was  originally  used  not 

with  the  infinitive  but  with  the  gerund  in  -<?,  and,  like  the  Latin  "  ad" 
with  the  gerund,  denoted  a  purpose.  Thus  "to  love"  was  originally 
"to  lovene,"  i.e.  "to  (or  toward)  loving"  (ad  amandum).  Gradually, 
as  to  superseded  the  proper  infinitival  inflection,  to  was  used  in 
other  and  more  indefinite  senses,  "for,"  "about,"  "in,"  "as 
regards,"  and,  in  a  word,  for  any  form  of  the  gerund  as  well  as  for 
the  infinitive. 

"  To  fright  you  thus  methinks  I  am  too  savage." — Macb.  iv.  2.  70. 
Not  "  too  savage  to  fright  you,"  but  "  in  or  for  frighting  you." 

"  I  was  too  strict  to  make  mine  own  away." — Rich.  II.  i.  3.  243. 
i.e.  "  I  was  too  severe  to  myself  in  sacrificing  my  son." 

"  Too  proud  to  be  (of  being)  so  valiant." — Coriol.  i.  i.  263. 

"I  will  not  shame  myself  to  give  you  (by  giving  you)  this." 

M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  431. 

"  Make  moan  to  be  abridged." — Ib.  i.  I.  126. 
Not,  "in  order  to  be"  but,   "  about  being  abridged." 

"  Who  then  shall  blame 
His  pester'd  senses  to  recoil  and  start." — Macb.  v.  2.  22. 

i.e.  "for  recoiling."     Comp.  T.  of  Sh.  iii.  2.  27  ;  A.  Y.  L.  v.  2.  110. 

"  O,  who  shall  hinder  me  to  wail  and  weep  1" 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  27. 
i.e.  "  as  regards,  or  from,  wailing." 

"  But  I  shall  grieve  you  to  report  (by  reporting)  the  rest." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  95. 
"  You  might  have  saved  me  my  pains  to  have  taken  away  the  ring." 

T.  N.  ii.  2.  6. 
i.e.  "by  having  taken  away." 

"  I  the  truer,  so  to  be  (for  being)  false  with  you." 

Cymb.  i.  5.  44. 

"Lest  the  State  shut  itself  out  to  take  any  penalty  for  the 
same."— B.  E.   158. 

i.e.  "as  regards  taking  anypenalty."  We  still  say,  "I  fear  to  do  it," 
where  "to"  has  no  meaning  of  purpose  ;  but  Bacon  wrote — 

"  Young  men  care  not  to  innovate." — B.  E.  161. 
"are  not  cautious  about  innovating."     So  Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  I.  71. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  257 

This  gerundive  use  of  the  infinitive  is  common  after  the  verb  "to 
mean  :'* 

"  What  mean  these  masterless  and  gory  swords 
To  lie  discolour'd  by  this  place  of  peace  ?" — R.  and  y.  v.  3. 143. 

"  What  mean  you,  sir, 

To  give  them  this  discomfort?" — A.  and  C.  iv.  I.  34. 
So  Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  I.  30. 

' '  To  weep  to  have  that  which  it  fears  to  lose. " — Sonn.  64. 
i.e.  "to  weep  because  of  having,  btcause-it  has." 

We  say,   "  I  took  eleven  hours  to  write  it,"  or  "  I  spent  eleven 
hours  in  writing,"  not 

"  Eleven  hours  I  spent  to  write  it  over." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  6.  5  ;  M.  of  V.  i.  I.  154. 

"  But  thou  strik'st  me 

Sorely,  to  say  (in  saying)  I  did." — W.  T.  v.  I.  18. 
"You  scarce  can  right  me  throughly  then  to  say 
You  did  mistake."— Ib.  ii.  I.  99. 

i.e.  "by  saying." 

"  I  know  not  what  I  shall  incur  to  pass  it." — Ib.  ii.  2.  57. 
i.e.  "I  know  not  what  penalty  I  shall  incur  as  the  consequence  of, 
or  for,  letting  it  pass." 

"You're  well  to  live."— W.  T.  iii.  3.  121. 

i.e.  "You  are  well  off  as  regards  living,"  resembles  our  modern, 
"  You  are  well  to  do."  The  infinitive  thus  used  is  seldom  preceded 
by  an  object  : 

"  So  that,  conclusions  to  be  as  kisses,  if  your  (221)  four  negatives 
Make  your  two  affirmatives,  why  then,"  &c. — T.  N.  v.  I.  22. 
"  What !  7,  that  kill'd  her  husband  and  his  father, 
To  take  her  in  her  heart's  extremest  hate  !" 

Rich.  III.  i.  2.  231-2. 

From  216  it  will  be  seen  that  the  English  pronoun,  when  it  repre- 
sents the  Latin  accusative  before  the  infinitive,  is  often  found  in  the 
nominative.  The  following  is  a  curious  instance  of  the  ambiguity 
attending  this  idiom  : — 

"  I  do  beseech  your  grace 
To  have  some  conference  with  your  grace  alone. " 

Rich.  II.  v.  3.  27, 

i.e.    "about  having  some   conference,"   and  here,    as  the   context 
shows,  "that  I  may  have  some  conference." 
s 


258  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Equally  ambiguous,  with  a  precisely  opposite  interpretation,  is 

"  Sir,  the  queen 

Desires  your  visitation,  and  to  be 
Acquainted  with  this  stranger." — Hen.  VIII.  v.  I.  169. 

i.e.  "and  that  you  will  become  acquainted." 

"Of  him  I  gather'd  honour 
Which  he  to  seek  (seeking)  of  me  again  perforce 
Behoves  me  keep  at  utterance." — Cymb.  iii.  2.  73. 

Probably  we  must  thus  explain  : 

"Thou'lt  torture  me  to  leave  unspoken  that 
Which,  to  bespoke,  would  torture  thee."— Ib.  v.  5.  139. 

i.e.  "You  wish  to  torture  me  for  leaving  unspoken  that  which,  by 
being  spoken,  would  torture  you." 

"Foul  is  most  foul  being  foul  to  be  a  scoffer," 

A.  Y.  L.  iii.  5.  62. 

seems  to  mean  "  foulness  is  most  foul  when  its  foulness  consists  in 
bring  scornful." 

357.   "To"  frequently  stands  at  the  beginning  of  a 

sentence  in  the  above  indefinite  signification.     Thus  Macb.  iv.  2. 
70,  quoted  above,  and — 

"  To  do  this  deed, 
Promotion  follows." — W.  T.  i.  2.  356. 

"  To  know  my  deed,  'twere  best  not  know  myself." 

Macbeth,  ii.  2.  73. 

"  To  say  to  go  with  you,  I  cannot." — B.  J.  E.  out  &>c.  iv.  6. 
"  To  belie  him  I  will  not."— A.  W.  iv.  3.  299. 
"  Other  of  them  may  have  crooked  noses,  but  to  owe  (as  regards 
owning)  such  straight  arms,  none." — Cymb.  iii.  I.  38. 

"For  of  one  grief  grafted  alone, 

To  graft  another  thereupon, 

A  surer  crab  we  can  have  none." — HEYWOOD. 
"  To  lack  or  lose  that  we  would  win 

So  that  our  fault  is  not  therein, 

What  woe  or  want  end  or  begin  ?  " — Ib. 

"  To  sue  to  live,  I  find  I  seek  to  die, 
And  seeking  death  find  life," — M.  for  M.  iii.  I.  43. 

where   "to  sue  to  live"  means   "as   regards  suing  to  live,"  and 
corresponds  to  "seeking  death." 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  259 

This  indefinite  use  of  the  infinitive  in  a  gerundive  sense  seems  to 
be  a  continuation  of  the  old  idiom  which  combined  to  with  the 
gerund. 

Less  frequently  the  clause  depends  on  "  that  : " 

"  But  that  I'll  give  my  voice  on  Richard's  side, 
God  knows  I  will  not  do  it." — Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  53. 

358.  For  to.   When  the  notion  of  purpose  is  to  be  brought  out, 
for  to  is  often  used  instead  of  to,  and  in  other  cases  also.     Similarly 
the  Danish  and  Swedish  languages  (Matzner)  have  "for  at,"  and 
the  old  French  has  "por  (pour)  a,"  with  the  infinitive.     For  to  is 
still  more  common  in  Early  English  than  in  Elizabethan. 

359.  Infinitive  active  is  often  found  where  we  use  the  passive, 
as  in 

"  Yet,  if  men  moved  him,  was  he  such  a  storm 

As  oft  'twixt  May  and  April  is  to  see."—L.  C,  102. 
This  is  especially  common   in  "  what's  to  do"  (T.  N.  iii.  3.  18  ; 
&c.)  for  "  what's  to  be  done."     See  Ellipses,  405,  and  compare 
"Savage,  extreme,  rude,  cruel,  not  to  trust  " — Sonn.  129. 
i.e.  "  not  to  be  trusted. " 

360.  Infinitive,  complete  Present.    It  is  now  commonly 

asserted  that  such  expressions  as  "  I  hoped  to  have  seen  him  yester- 
day" are  ungrammatical.  But  in  the  Elizabethan  as  in  Early 
English  authors,  after  verbs  of  hoping,  intending,  or  verbs  signifying 
that  something  ought  to  have  been  done  but  was  not,  the  Complete 
Present  Infinitive  is  used.  We  still  retain  this  idiom  in  the  expression, 
"  I  -would  (i.e.  wished  to]  have  done  it."  "  I  ought  (i.e.  was  bound) 
to  have  done  it. "  But  we  find  in  Shakespeare— 

"  I  hoped  thou  shouldst  have  been  my  Hamlet's  wife; 
I  thought  thy  bride-bed  to  have  decKd,  sweet  maid. " 

Hamlet,  v.  I.  268. 

"Thought  to  have  begg'd."— Cymb.  iii.  6.  48. 
In     "Levied  an  army  weening  to  redeem, 

And  have  installed  me  in  the  diadem,"— I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  89, 
it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  juxtaposition  of  the  simple  present  with 
an  apparently  complete  present  infinitive.  Probably  have  is  here 
used  in  the  sense  of  "cause,"  i.e.  "thinking  to  redeem  me  and 
to  have  me  install'd,"  "  to  cause  me  to  be  install'd."  So  in 
s  2 


26o  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Ambitious  love  hath  so  in  me  offended 
That  barefoot  plod  I  the  cold  ground  upon 
With  sainted  vow  my  faults  to  have  amended" 

A.   W.  iii.  4.  7. 

"to  have  amended"  seems  to  mean  "to  cause  to  be  amended." 
But  possibly  there  is  no  need  for  this  supposition  of  transposition. 
The  thought  of  unfulfilment  and  disappointment  growing  on  the 
speaker  might  induce  her  to  put  the  latter  verb  in  the  complete 
present  infinitive. 

"  Pharnabazus  came  thither  thinking  to  have  raised  the  siege." — 
N.  P.  179- 

Sometimes  the  infinitive  is  used  without  a  verb  of  "thinking,"  to 
imply  an  unfulfilled  action. 

"  I  told  him  of  myself,  which  was  as  much 

As  to  have  ask }d him  pardon." — A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  79. 
But  often  it  seems  used  by  attraction   to    "have,"  expressed   or 
implied  in  a  previous  verb. 

"  She  would  have  made  Hercules  to  have  turned  spit." 

M.  Ado,  ii.  I.  261. 

"  I  had  not  (i.e.  should  not  have)  been  persuaded  to  have  hurled 
These  few  ill-spoken  lines  into  the  world. " 

BEAUMONT  on  Faithful  Shepherdess. 

So  Milton  :  "He  trusted  to  have  equalVd  the  Most  High." 

The  same  idiom  is  found  in  Latin  poetry  (Madvig,  407.  Obs.  2) 
after  verbs  of  -wishing  and  intending.  The  reason  of  the  idiom 
seems  to  be  a  desire  to  express  that  the  object  wished  or  intended  is 
a  completed  fact,  that  has  happened  contrary  to  the  wish  and  cannot 
now  be  altered. 

361.  Subjunctive,  simple  form.    See  also  Be,  Were,  An, 

But,  If,  &c.  The  subjunctive  (a  consequence  of  the  old  inflectional 
form)  was  frequently  used,  not  as  now  with  would,  should,  &c.,  but 
in  a  form  identical  with  the  indicative,  where  nothing  but  the 
context  (in  the  case  of  past  tenses)  shows  that  it  is  the  subjunctive, 
as  : 

"  But,  if  my  father  had  not  scanted  me, 
Yourself,  renowned  prince,  then  stood  as  fair." 

M.ofV.\\.  I.  17. 

"  Preferment  goes  by  letter  and  affection, 
And  not  by  old  gradation  where  each  second 
Stood  heir  to  the  first."—  Othello,  i.  I.  38. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  261 

If  it  be  asked  what  is  the  difference  between  "stood  "  here  and 
"would  have  stood,"  I  should  say  that  the  simple  form  of  the 
subjunctive,  coinciding  in  sound  with  the  indicative,  implied  to  an 
Elizabethan  more  of  inevitability  (subject,  of  course,  to  a  condition 
which  is  not  fulfilled).  "Stood"  means  "would  certainly  have 
stood."  The  possibility  is  regarded  as  an  unfulfilled  fact,  to  speak 
paradoxically.  Compare  the  Greek  idiom  of  'Iva.  with  the  indicative. 

"If  he  did  not  care  whether  he  had  their  love  or  no,  he  waived 
indifferently  'twixt  doing  them  neither  good  nor  harm  ;  but  he  seeks 
their  hate  with  greater  devotion  than  they  can  render  it  him." — 
Coriol.  ii.  2.  17. 

"If  they 

Should  say,  'Be  good  to  Rome,'  they  charged  him  even 
As  those  should  do,"  &c. — Coriol.  iv.  6.  112. 
"  (If  I  rebuked  you)  then  I  check' d  my  friends." 

Rich.  HI.  iii.  7.  150. 

"Till"  is  used  varyingly  with  the  indicative  present,  future,  and 
the  subjunctive. 

The  subjunctive  is  found  after  "so"  in  the  sense  of  "so  (that)," 
i.e.  "(if  it  be)  so  (that)." 

"I  will  .  .  .  endow  a  child  of  thine, 
So  in  the  Lethe  of  thy  angry  soul 
Thou  drown  the  sad  remembrance  of  these  wrongs. " 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  251. 

Sometimes  the  presence  of  the  subjunctive,  used  conditionally 
(where,  as  in  the  case  of  did,  the  subjunctive  and  indicative  are 
identical  in  inflections),  is  indicated  by  placing  the  verb  before  the 
subject : 

"  Did  I  tell  this  .  .  .  who  would  believe  me  ?" 

M.for  M.  ii.  4.  171. 
"Live  Roderigo, 
He  calls  me  to  a  restitution."—  Othello,  v.  I.  14. 

"  Live  a  thousand  years, 

I  shall  not  find  myself  so  fit  to  die." — y.  C.  iii.  I.  159. 
"Livethou,  I  live."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  61. 
Where  we  should  say,  "  Should  I  tell,  live,"  &c. 

The  indicative  is  sometimes  found  where  the  subjunctive  might 
be  expected: 

"  Pleaseth  you  walk  with  me  down  to  his  house, 

I  will  discharge  my  bond," — C.  of  E.  iv.  i.  12. 
where  the  first  clause  might  be  taken  interrogatively,  "  Is  it  your 


262  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

pleasure  to  walk  with  me?  In  that  case  I  will,"  &c.  So  2 Hen.  IV. 
iv.  I.  225.  Perhaps  we  may  thus  explain  the  so-called  imperative 
in  the  first  person  plural : 

"  Well,  sit  we  down, 
And  let  us  hear  Bernardo  speak  of  this." — Hamlet,  i.  i.  33. 

i.e.  " suppose  we  sit  down?"  "what  if  we  sit  down?"  Compare 
Ib.  168. 

So        "  Alcib.  I'll  take  the  gold  thou  giv'st  me,  not  all  thy  counsel. 
Timon.  Dost  thou,  or  dost  thou  not,  Heaven's  curse  upon 
thee  \"—T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  131. 

So  "willy-nilly"  and 

"  He  left  this  ring  behind  him,  would  I  or  not." — T.  N.  i.  5.  321. 

"Please"  is,  however,  often  found  in  the  subjunctive,  even 
interrogatively. 

"Please  it  you  that  I  call?"— 7*.  of  Sh.  iv.  4.  1. 
It  then  represents  our  modern  "may  it  please?"  and   expresses 
a  modest  doubt. 

The  subjunctive  is  also  found,  more  frequently  than  now,  with  if, 
though,  &c.  The  subjunctive  "he  dare"  is  more  common  than 
"he  dares"  in  the  historical  plays,  but  far  less  common  in  the 
others.  The  only  difference  between  the  two  is  a  difference  of 
thought,  the  same  as  between  "he  can  jump  six  feet"  and  "he 
could  jump  six  feet,"  i.e.  if  he  liked. 

Compare         "  For  I  know  thou  darest, 

But  this  thing  dare  not."  * — Tempest,  in.  2.  62-3. 

i.e.  "would  not  dare  on  any  consideration  :"  stronger  than  "dares." 
The  indiscriminate    use    of  "dare"   and    "dares"    (regulated, 
perhaps,  by  some  regard  to  euphony)  is  illustrated  by 

"  Here  boldly  spread  thy  hands,  no  venom'd  weed 
Dares  blister  them,  no  slimy  snail  dare  creep. " 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iii.  I. 

362.  Subjunctive  auxiliary  forms.    The  simple  form  of  the 

subjunctive  is  sometimes  interchanged  and  co-ordinate  with  the 
auxiliary  form. 

"If  thou  wert  the  ass,  thy  dulness  would  torment  thee,  and 
still  thou  li-vedst  but  as  a  breakfast  to  the  wolf;  if  thou  wert  the 
wolf,  thy  greediness  would  afflict  thee,  and  oft  thou  shouldst  hazard 
thy  life  for  a  dinner ;  wert  thou  a  horse,  thou  wouldest  be  seized  by 

*  " This  thing "  means  "this  creature  Trinculo,"  and  is  antithetical  to  "thou." 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  263 

the  leopard  ;  wert  thou  a  leopard,  thou  wert  german  to  the  lion." — 
T.  of  A.  iv.  3.  385-94. 

Note  here  that  "livedst  "  and  "shouldst"  imply  inevitability  and 
compulsion.  "  Wouldest"  is  used  in  the  passive  because  the  passive 
in  itself  implies  compulsion.  "  Would  "  is  used  after  "  dulness  " 
and  "greediness."  because  they  are  quasi-personified  as  -voluntary 
persecutors.  Why  not ' '  hazardedst "  as  well  as  ' '  livedst  ?  "  Perhaps 
to  avoid  the  double  d. 

"Do,"  "did,"  are  often  used  with  verbs  in  the  subjunctive  : 

"  Better  far,  I  guess, 

That  we  do  make  our  entrance  several  ways. " — I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  I.  30. 
"Lest  your  retirement  do  amaze  your  friends." — I  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  5. 

363.  The  Subjunctive  is  replaced  by  the  Indicative  after 

"if,"  where  there  is  no  reference  to  futurity,  and  no  doubt  is 
expressed,  as  in  "if  thou  lovest  me." 

"O  Nell,  sweet  Nell,  //  thou  dost  love  thy  lord, 
Banish  the  cankers  of  ambitious  thoughts." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  17. 

"An  thou  canst  not  smile  as  the  wind  sits,  thou'lt  catch  cold 
shortly." — Lear,  \.  4.  112. 

"Ah,  no  more  of  that,  Hal,  an  thou  lovest  me." — I  Hen.  IV. 
ii.  4.  312. 

In  the  last  example  Falstaff  is  assuming  the  Prince's  love  as  a 
present  fad  in  order  to  procure  the  immediate  cessation  of  ridicule. 
But  in  the  following  he  asks  the  Prince  to  do  him  a  favour  regarded 
as, future,  and  as  somewhat  more  doubtful: — 

"If  thou  love  me,  practise  an  answer." — I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  411. 
Incredulity  is  expressed  in 

"If  thou  have  power  to  raise  him,  bring  him  hither." 

Ib.  Hi.  I.  60. 

In     "If  thou  dost  nod  thou  breaKst  thy  instrument," 

J.  C.  iv.  3.  271. 

the  meaning  is  "you  are  sure  to  break,"  and  the  present  indicative 
being  used  in  the  consequent,  is  also  used  in  the  antecedent  So  in 

"  I  am  quickly  ill  and  well 
So  (almost  'since')  Antony  loves" — A.  and  C.  \.  3.  73. 

In  "  It  (my  purpose)  is  no  more 

But  that  your  daughter,  ere  she  seems  as  won, 
Desires  this  ring,"— A.  W.  iii.  7.  32. 


264  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

the  purpose  is  regarded  graphically  as  a  fact  in  the  act  of  being 
completed.  However,  the  indiscriminate  use  of  the  indicative  and 
subjunctive  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  is  illustrated 
by  the  A.  V.  St.  Matt.  v.  23  : 

"Therefore,    if   thou  bring  thy  gift  to    the  altar,    and    there 
remembercsi." 

364.  Subjunctive  used  optatively  or  imperatively.    This 

was  more  common  then  than  in  modern  poetry. 

"  Who's  first  in  worth,  the  same  be  first  in  place." 

B.  J.  Cy.'s  Rev.  v.  I. 
(May)  "  Your  own  good  thoughts  excuse  me,  and  farewell." 

L.  L.  L.  ii.  i.  177. 

"  O  heavens,  that  they  were  living  both  in  Naples, 
The  king  and  queen  there !  (provided)  that  they  were,  I  wish 
Myself  were  mudded  in  the  oozy  bed." — Tempest,  v.  I.  150. 

"  No  man  inveigh  against  the  wither'd  flower, 
But  chide  rough  winter  that  the  flower  hath  kill'd." 

R.  of  L. 

"  In  thy  fats  our  cares  be  drowned, 
With  thy  grapes  our  hairs  fo crowned." — A.  and  C.  ii.  7.  122. 

The  juxtaposition  of  an  imperative  sometimes  indicates  the  im- 
perative use. 

"Touch  you  the  sourest  points  with  sweetest  terms, 
Nor  (let)  curstness  grozu  to  the  matter." — A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  25. 

"  Good  now,  sit  down,  and  tell  me  he  that  knows,"  &c. 

Hamlet,  i.  I.  70. 

"  Take  Antony  Octavia  to  his  wife."— A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  129. 
"Run  one  before,  and  let  the  queen  know."— Ib.  iv.  8.  1. 
"Thus  time  we  waste,  and  longest  leagues  make  short ; 
Sail  seas  in  cockles,  have  an  wish  but  for  V 

F.  f>f  T.  iv.  4.  Go-vyer,  2. 

i.e.  " Let  any  one  but  wish  it,  and  we  will  sail  seas  in  cockles." 
Sometimes  only  the  context  shows  the  imperative  use  : 

"  For  his  passage, 

(See  that)  The  soldiers'  music  and  the  rites  of  war 
Speak  loudly  for  him. "— Hamlet,  v.  2.  411. 

The  "and"  is  superfluous,  or  else  "question"  is  imperative,  in 
"  Question,  your  grace,  the  late  ambassadors, 
And  you  shall  find."— Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  31. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  265 

So  in     "Hold out  my  horse  and  I  will  first  be  there." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  300. 
"Then  (see  that)  every  soldier  kill  his  prisoners." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  6.  37. 

On  the  other  hand,  "prove"  is  conditional  (or  "and"  is  omitted) 
in 

"O  my  father! 

Prove  you  that  any  man  with  me  conversed, 
Refuse  me,  hate  me,  torture  me  to  death. " 

M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  182-6. 

Often  it  is  impossible  to  tell  whether  we  have  an  imperative  with 
a  vocative,  or  a  subjunctive  used  optatively  or  conditionally. 

"Melt  Egypt  into  Nile,  and  kindly  creatures 
Turn  all  to  serpents." — A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  73. 

"That  I  shall  clear  myself, 
Lay  all  the  weight  yc  can  upon  my  patience, 
I  make  as  little  doubt  as,"  &c  .—//<?«.  VIII.  v.  i.  66. 
"Now  to  that  name  my  courage  prove  my  title." 

A.  and  C.  v.  2.  291. 
"  Sport  and  repose  turn  from  me  day  and  night." 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  218. 

365.  This  optative  use  of  the  subjunctive  dispensing  with 

"  let,"  "may,"  &c.  gives  great  vigour  to  the  Shakespearian  line  : 

"  Judge  m&  the  world."—  Othello,  i.  2.  72. 
i.  e.  ' '  let  the  world  judge  for  me. " 

"  Disorder,  that  hath  spoil'd  us,  friend  us  now." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  5.  17. 
"  Long  die  thy  happy  days  before  thy  death." 

Rich.  III.  i.  3.  207. 

"The  worm  of  conscience  still  begnaw  thy  soul." — Ib.  222. 
The  reader  of  Shakespeare  should  always  be  ready  to  recognize 
the  subjunctive,  even  where  the  identity  of  the  subjunctive  with  the 
indicative  inflection  renders  distinction  between  two  moods  impos- 
sible, except  from  the  context.     Thus : 

"  Therefore  take  with  thee  my  most  heavy  curse, 
Which  in  the  day  of  battle  tire  thee  more 
Than  all  the  complete  armour  that  thou  wear'st  ! 
My  prayers  on  the  adverse  party  fight, 
And  there  the  little  souls  of  Edward's  children 
Whisper  the  spirits  of  thine  enemies, 
And  promise  them  success  and  victory." — Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  190. 


266  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Here,  in  the  second  line,  "tire,"  necessarily  subjunctive,  im- 
presses upon  the  reader  that  the  co-ordinate  verbs,  "fight,"  &c.,  are 
also  subjunctive.  But  else,  it  would  be  possible  for  a  careless 
reader  to  take  "  fight,"  &c.  as  indicative,  and  ruin  the  passage. 

This  optative  or  imperative  use  of  the  subjunctive,  though 
common  in  Elizabethan  writers,  had  already  begun  to  be  supplanted 
by  auxiliaries.  Thus  Wickliffe  has  (Coloss.  ii.  16)  "No  man  juge 
you,"  while  all  the  other  versions  have  "  Let  no  man  judge  you." 

366.  Subjunctive,  complete  present.    (See  Should  for  "if 

he  should  have.")  The  subjunctive  with  "have"  is  not  very 
frequent.  It  is  used  where  a  past  event  is  not  indeed  denied,  but 
qualified  conditionally,  in  an  argumentative  manner  : 

"If,  sir,  perchance 

She  have  restrain'd  the  riots  of  your  followers, 
'Tis  on  such  ground  ...  as  clears  her  from  all  blame." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  145. 

i.e.  "If  it  should  hereafter  be  proved  that  she  have"  "if  so  be  that 
she  have" 
So         "If  this  young  gentleman  have  done  offence." 

T.  N.  iii.  4.  344. 

"Though  it  have"  is  somewhat  similarly  used  to  express  a  conces- 
sion for  the  sake  of  argument,  not  a  fact. 

' '  For  though  it  have  holp  madmen  to  their  wits. " 

Rich.  II.  v.  5.  62. 

367.  Subjunctive  used  indefinitely  after  the  Relative. 

"In  her  youth 

There  is  a  prone  and  speechless  dialect 
Such  as  move  men." — M.  for  M.  i.  2.  189 
"  And  the  stars  whose  feeble  light 

Give  a  pale  shadow." — B.  and  F. 
"But  they  whose  guilt  within  their  bosom  lie 

Imagine  every  eye  beholds  their  blame."— R.  of  L,  ii.  1344. 
"  Thou  canst  not  die,  whilst  any  zeal  abound.'' 

DANIEL  (quoted  by  WALKER). 
"  I  charge  you  to  like  as  much  of  this  play  as  please  you." 

A.   Y.  L.  Epilogue. 
"  And  may  direct  his  course  as  please  himself." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  129. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  267 

Perhaps  (but  see  218) 

"Alas,  their  love  may  be  called  appetite, 
No  motion  of  the  liver,  but  the  palate 
That  suffer  surfeit."—  T.  N.  ii.  4.  102. 

In  the  subordinate  clauses  of  a  conditional  sentence,  the  relative 
is  often  followed  by  the  subjunctive  : 

"A  man  that  were  to  sleep  your  sleep." — Cymb.  v.  4.  179. 
i.e.   "  If  there  were  a  man  who  was  destined  to  sleep  your  sleep." 

"  If  they  would  yield  us  but  the  superfluity  while  it  were  whole- 
some."— Coriol.  i.  I.  18. 

368.  Subjunctive  in  a  subordinate  sentence.  The  sub- 
junctive is  often  used  with  or  without  "that,"  to  denote  a  purpose 
(see  above,  That).  But  it  is  also  used  after  "  that,"  "who,"  &c.  in 
dependent  sentences  where  no  purpose  is  implied,  but  only  futurity.* 

"  Be  it  of  less  expect 

That  matter  needless  of  importless  burden 
Divide  thy  lips."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  71. 

No  "purpose"  can  be  said  to  be  implied  in  "please,"  in  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

"  May  it  please  you,  madam, 
That  he  bid  Helen  come  to  you." — A.  W.  i.  3.  71. 

"Yet  were  it  true 

To  say  this  boy  were  like  me." — W.  T.  i.  2.  135. 
"  Thou  for  whom  Jove  would  swear 

Juno  but  an  vEthiop  were." — L.  L.  L.  iv.  3.  118. 
"  Would  you  not  swear  that  she  were  a  maid  ?" 

M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  40. 
"  One  would  think  his  mother's  milk  were  scarce  out  of  him." 

T.  N.  i.  5.  171. 

la  the  last  four  passages  the  second  verb  is  perhaps  attracted  to 
the  mood  of  the  first. 

' '  Proteus.  But  she  is  dead. 
Silv.  Say  that  she  be:  yet,"  &c. 

T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  2.  109. 
"  With  no  show  of  fear, 

No,  with  no  more  than  if  we  heard  that  England 
Were  busied  with  a  Whitsun  Morris-dance." 

Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  25. 

*  I  have  found  no  instance  in  Shakespeare  like  the  following,  quoted  by 
V\  alker  from  Sidney's  A  rcadia : 

"  And  I  think  there  she  do  dwell." 


268  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"I  pray  (hope)  his  absence  proceed  by  swallowing  that." 

Cymb.  iii.  5.  58. 

"If  it  be  proved  against  an  alien 
That  by  direct  or  indirect  attempt 
He  seek  the  life  of  any  citizen."—^/,  of  V.  iv.  I.  351. 
1 '  One  thing  more  rests  that  thyself  execute. "—  T.  ofSh.  i.  1 .  251. 
where,  however,   "that"  may  be  the  relative,  and  "execute"  an 
imperative. 

I  know  of  no  other  instance  in  Shakespeare  but  the  following, 
where  the  subjunctive  is  used  after  "that"  used  for  "so  that," 
of  a  fact : 

"Through  the  velvet  leaves  the  wind 
All  unseen  can  passage  find, 
That  the  lover  sick  to  death 

Wish  himself  the  heaven's  breath."— Z.  Z.  Z.  iv.  3.  108. 
The  metre  evidently  may  have  suggested  this  licence  :  or  -es  or  *d 
may  have  easily  dropped  out  of  "  wisher"  or  "  wishV." 
The  subjunctive  is  used  where  we  should  use  the  future  in 

"I  doubt  not  you  (will)  sustain  what  you're  worthy  of  by  your 
attempt."—  Cymb.  i.  4.  125. 

"Think"  seems  used  subjunctively,  and  "that"  as  a  conjunction  in 
"And    heaven    defend  (prevent)   your   good   souls   that  you 

(should)  think 

I  will  your  serious  and  great  business  scant 
For  (because)  she  is  with  me." — Othello,  i.  3.  267. 

The  "that  "  is  sometimes  omitted  : 

"It  is  impossible  they  bear  it  out." — Ib.  ii.  I.  19. 
Here  "bear"  is  probably  the  subjunctive.     The  subjunctive  is  by 
no  means  always  used  in  such  sentences.     We  may  contrast 

"  No  matter  then  who  see  it."— Rich.  II.  v.  2.  59. 

"  I  care  not  -who  know  it." — Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  118. 
with 

"  I  care  not  who  knows  so  much."—  T.  N.  iii.  4.  300. 

369.  The   Subjunctive   after  verbs  of  command  and 

entreaty  is  especially  common  ;  naturally,  since  command  implies 
a  purpose. 

"We  enjoin  thee  that  thou  carry."— W.  T.  ii.  3.  174. 

"I  conjure  thee  that  thou  declare" — Ib.  i.  2.  402. 
So  M.  for  M.  v.  i.  50. 


VERBS,  MOODS  AND  TENSES.  269 

"Tell  him  from  me 
He  bear  himself  with  honourable  action." 

T.  ofSh.  Ind.  i.  i.  110. 
"Thy  dukedom  I  resign,  and  do  entreat 
Thou/0AY/<?w  me  my  wrongs." — Temp.  v.  I.  119. 

So  after  "forbid." 

"  Fortune  forbid  my  outside  have  not  charmed  her." 

T.  N.  ii.  2.  19. 
Sometimes  an  auxiliary  is  used  : 

"I  do  beseech  your  majesty///^ salve" — I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  155. 
Hence  in  such  passages  as 

"Go  charge  my  goblins  that  they  grind  their  joints," 

Temp.  iv.  I.  259. 
the  verb  is  to  be  considered  as  in  the  subjunctive. 

After  a  past  tense  "should"  is  used  : 

"She  bade  me  ...  I  should  teach  him." — Othello,  i.  3.  165. 

370.  Irregular  sequence  of  tenses.   Sometimes  the  sequence 

of  tenses  is  not  observed  in  these  dependent  sentences  : 
' '  Therefore  they  thought  it  good  you  hear  a  play. " 

T.  ofSh.  Ind.  2.  136. 

" '  Twere  good  you  do  so  much  for  charity. " — M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  261. 
In  both  cases  a  present  is  implied  in  the  preceding  verb  :  "They 
thought  and  think,"  "It  were  and  is  good." 
Reversely  in 

"But  do  not  stain 
The  even  virtue  of  our  enterprise 
To  think  that  or  our  cause  or  our  performance 
Z>«/»m/anoath."— J.   C.  ii.  I.  136. 

"Did  need"  means  "ever  could  need,"  and  is  stronger  than 
"need"  or  "can  need."  In 

"  Is  it  not  meet  that  I  did  amplify  my  judgment?" — Cymb.  i.  5.  17. 
as  in  " It  is  time  he  came,"  the  action  is  regarded  as  one  "meet"  in 
time  past,  as  well  as  in  the  future. 

"It  hath  been  taught  us  from  the  primal  state 
That  he  which  is  is  wished  until  he  were" — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  42. 

Here  "were"  is  used  partly  for  euphony  and  alliteration,  partly 
because  the  speaker  is  speaking  of  the  past,  "is  and  was  always 
wished  until  he  were." 


270  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR, 

371.  Conditional  sentences.  The  consequent  does  not  always 
answer  to  the  antecedent  in  mood  or  tense.  Frequently  the  irregu- 
larity can  be  readily  explained  by  a  change  of  thought. 

"And  that  Yll  prove  on  better  men  than  Somerset, 
(Or  rather,  I  would)  Were  growing  time  once  ripen'd  to 
my  will."— I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  4.  98. 

So  3  Hen.  VI.  v.  7.  21. 

"If  we  shall  stand  still 
(Or  rather,  if  we  should,  for  we  shall  not)  We  should  take  root." 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  86. 
"I  w/7/find 
Where  truth  is  hid,  (and  I  would  find  it)  though  it  "were  hid 

indeed 
Within  the  centre."— Hamlet,  ii.  2.  157-8. 

Compare  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  A.  V.  : 

"  Though  these  three  men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  were  in  it,  they 
should  deliver  but  their  own  souls. " 

with  ib.  20,  "they  shall  deliver." 

"But  if  the  gods  themselves  did  see  her  then 

(If  they  had  seen  her)  The  instant  burst  of  clamour  that  she 

made 
Would  have  made  milch  the  burning  eyes  of  heaven." 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  535-40. 
' '  Till  I  know  'tis  done, 
Howe'er  my  hopes  (might  be),  my  joys  were  ne'er  begun." 

Ib.  iv.  3.  70. 

Sometimes  the  consequent  is  put  graphically  in  the  present  merely 
for  vividness  : 

"If  he  should  do  so, 
He  leaves  his  back  unarm'd  j  .  .  .  never  fear  that." 

2  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  80. 

Or  else  the  speaker  rises  in  the  tone  of  confidence  : 
"  I  am  assured,  if  I  be  measured  rightly, 
Your  majesty  hath  no  just  cause  to  hate  me." — Ib.  v.  2.  66. 


PARTICIPLES. 

372.  Participles,  Active.  Our  termination  -ing  does  duty  for 
(l)  the  old  infinitive  in  -an;  (2)  the  old  imperfect  participle  in  end, 
ende,  ande ;  and  (3)  a  verbal  noun  in  -ung.  Hence  arises  great  con- 


PARTICIPLES.  271 

fusion.  It  would  sometimes  appear  that  Shakespeare  fancied  that 
•ing  was  equivalent  to  -en,  the  old  affix  of  the  Passive  Participle. 
Thus— 

"  From  his  all- obey  ing  breath 
I  hear  the  doom  of  Egypt." — A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  77. 

i.e.  "  obeyed  by  all." 

"  Many  a  dry  drop  seemed  a  MQAfajf  Mar." — R.  of  L.  i.  1375. 
So  "  His  unrecalling  crime  "  (R.  of  L.}  for  "  unrecalled." 
(In  "  Many  excesses  which  are  owing a.  man  till  his  age," — B.  E.  122. 
i.e.  "own,  or,  belonging  to  a  man,"  owing  is  not  a  participle  at  all, 
but  an  adjective,  "agen,"  "awen,"  "owen,"  "owenne,"  "owing;" 
which  was  mistaken  for  a  participle. 

"There  is  more  owing  her  than  is  paid." — A.  IV.  i.  3.  107. 
"  Wanting,  "as  in  Coriol.  ii.  I.  217,  "One  thing  is  wanting"  can  be 
explained  from  the  use  of  the  verb  wanteth  in  the  following  passage  : 

"  There  wanUth  now  our  brother  Gloucester  here 
To  make  the  period  of  this  perfect  peace. " — R.  III.  ii.  I.  43. ) 

The  same  explanation  may  apply  to  "I  am  much  beholding  to 
you,"  which  is  sometimes  found  for  "beholden,"  Rich.  III.  ii.  1.129, 
J.  C.  iii.  2.  70-3,  and  even  to 

"  Relish  your  nimble  notes  to  pleasing  ears." — R.  of  L. 

In  the  following,  -ing  might  be  supplanted,  without  altering  the 
sense,  by  the  infinitive  or  the  verbal  preceded  by  a-  :* 

' '  Women  are  angels,  wooing : 
Things  won  are  done." — Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  2.  312. 

i.e.  "women  are  considered  angels  to  woo,  or  a-wooingt"  where 
wooing,  if  treated  as  an  ordinary  present  participle,  would  give  the 
opposite  to  the  intended  meaning.  Probably  in  the  above,  as  in 
the  following,  a-  is  omitted. 

"  Be  brief,  lest  that  the  process  of  thy  kindness 
Last  longer  (a-,  or  in)  telling  than  thy  kindness  date." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  254. 
The  "in"  is  inserted  in 

"  Pause  a  day  or  two 

Before  you  hazard  ;  for  in  choosing  wrong  I  lose  your  com- 
pany."— M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  2. 

*  Comp.  "  Return/«£-  were  as  tedious  as  (to)  go  o'er," — Macb.  iii.  4.  138. 
in  which  the  ing  perhaps  qualifies  "  go"  as  well  as  "  return,"  and  might  be  sup- 
planted by  "  to." 


272  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

i.e.  "in  the  event  of  your  choosing  wrong,  /  lose  your  company." 
The  two  constructions  occur  together  in 

1 '  Come,  come,  in  wooing  sorrow  let's  be  brief, 
Since,  (a.-)wedding  it,  there  is  such  length  in  grief." 

Rich.  II.  v.  3.  72. 

It  is  perhaps  a  result  of  this  confusion  between  the  verbal  and  the 
infinitive  that,  just  as  the  infinitive  with  "  to"  is  used  independently 
at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence  (357)  in  a  gerundive  signification,  so 
is  the  infinitive  represented  by  -ing : 

"  Why,  were  thy  education  ne'er  so  mean, 
Having  thy  limbs,  a  thousand  fairer  courses 
Offer  themselves  to  thy  election. "— B.  J.  E.  in  &>c.  ii.  i. 

i.e.  "since  thou  hast  thy  limbs."  This  explains  the  many  instances 
in  which  present  participles  appear  to  be  found  agreeing  with  no 
noun  or  pronoun. 

Part  of  this  confusion  may  arise  from  the  use  of  the  verbal  in  -ing 
as  a  noun  in  compounds.  We  understand  at  once  that  a  "  knedyng 
trowh"  (CHAUCER,  C.  T.  3548)  means  "a  trough  for  kneading;" 
but  "spending  silver"  (Ib.  12946)  is  not  quite  so  obviously 
"money  for  spending."  Still  less  could  we  say 

"  Sixth  part  of  each  !  A  trembling  contribution. " 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  95. 

Somewhat  different  is 

"  Known  and  feeling  sorrows," — Lear,  iv.  6.  226. 
where  "feeling"  seems  to  be  used  like  "known,"  passively,  "known 
and  realized  sorrows. " 

So  "loading"  is  used  for  "laden,"  BACON,  Essays,  p.  49 
(Wright). 

"  Your  discontenting  father,  "-W.  T.  iv.  4.  543. 
may  perhaps  be  explained  by  the  use  of  the  verb  "content  you  ;" 
"  I  discontent  (me)  "  meaning  "  I  am  discontented." 

373,  The  Verbal  differs  in  Elizabethan  usage  from  its  modern 
use.  (a)  We  do  not  employ  the  verbal  as  a  noun  followed  by  "  of," 
unless  the  verbal  be  preceded  by  "the,"  or  some  other  defining 
adjective.  But  such  phrases  as  the  following  are  of  constant 
occurrence  in  Elizabethan  English  : 

"  To  disswade  the  people  from  making  of  league." — N.  P.  170. 
"  He  was  the  onely  cause  of  murdering  of  the  poor  Melians." 

Ib.  171. 


PARTICIPLES.  273 

"  By  winning  only  of  Sicilia." — N.  P.  171. 

"  Enter  Clorin  the  Shepherdess,  sorting  of  herbs." 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  ii.  (. 

i.e.  "  a-sorting,  or  in  sorting  of  herbs." 

For  instances  from  Shakespeare,  see  1 78  and  93. 

(b)  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  verbal  is  constituted  a  noun  by 
the  dependence  of  "  the,"  or  any  other  adjective  (except  a  possessive 
adjective)  upon  it,  we  cannot  omit  the  of.  The  Elizabethans  can. 

"  To  plague  thee  for  thy  foul  misleading  me." 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  I.  97. 

We  should  prefer  now  to  omit  the  "thy"  as  well  as  "foul," 
though  we  have  not  rejected  such  phrases  as 

"  Upon  his  leaving  our  house." — Goldsmith. 

For  instances  of  "of"  omitted  when  "  the"  precedes  the  verbal, 
see  Article,  93.  In  this  matter  modern  usage  has  recurred  to  E.  E. 

374.  Participles,  Passive.  It  has  been  shown  (294)  that,  from 
the  licence  of  converting  nouns,  adjectives,  and  neuter  verbs  into 
active  verbs,  there  arose  an  indefinite  and  apparently  not  passive 
use  of  Passive  Participles.  Such  instances  as 

"  Of  all  he  dies/wj««Vof,M— M.  of  V.  v.  i.  293. 
(possess  being  frequently  used  as  an  active  verb,)  may  thus  be  ex- 
plained. 

Perhaps, 

"  And,  gladly  quaked  (made  to  quake),  hear  more," 

Coriol.  i.  9.  6. 
may  be  similarly  explained.     Compare  also  : 

"  All  the  whole  army  stood  agazed on  him." 

I  Hen.   VI.  i.  I.  126. 

But,  in  the  following,  we  can  only  say  that,  in  the  excessive  use 
of  this  licence,  -cd  is  loosely  employed  for  -ful,  -itig,  or  some  other 
affix  expressing  connection. 

"  Revenge  the  jeering  and  disdained  contempt." 

I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  183. 

"  2?rvm&/-w*tchfn]  day." — K.  y.  iii.  3.  52. 
As  we  talk  of  "  watching  (during)  the  night,"  this  may  explain 
44  The  weary  and  rib-watched  night.  "—Hen.  V.  iv.  Prologue,  33. 
T 


274  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

But  more  probably  "all-watched"  (like  "o'er- watched,  "7.  C.  iv.  3. 
241)  resembles  "weary,"  and  means  "tired  with  watching."  For 
this  use  of  adjectives  see  4. 

"  Gnm-lootf d  night.  "-M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  171. 

"  The  ebbed  man."— A.  and  C.  i.  4.  43. 
It  is  perhaps  still  not  unusual  to  say  "the  tide  is  ebbed." 

"  A  moulten  raven."— I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  i.  152. 

"  With  sainted  vow."— A.  W.  iii.  4.  7.     (=  saintly). 
"  And  at  our  more  considered  time  we'll  read." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  81. 

"  Unconstrained  gyves. " — L.  C.  242. 

Sometimes  passive  participles  are  used  as  epithets  to  describe  the 
state  which  would  be  the  result  of  the  active  verb.  Thus : 

"  Why  a.reyoM  drawn?"—  Temp.  ii.  I.  308;  M.N.D.  iii.  2.  402. 
i.e.  "  Why  do  1  find  you  with  your  swords  drawn?" 

"  Under  the  blow  of  thralled  discontent." — Sonn.  124. 
"The  valued  file"  (Macb.  iii.    I.   95)  perhaps  means  "the  file  or 
catalogue  to  which  values  are  attached." 

375.  The  Passive  Participle  is  often  used  to  signify,  not  that 
which  was  and  is,  but  that  which  was,  and  therefore  can  be  hereafter. 
In  other  words,  -ed  is  used  for  -able. 

"  Inestimable  stones,  unvalued  jewels." — Rich.  III.  i.  4.  27. 
i.e.  "invaluable." 

"  All  unavoided  is  the  doom  of  destiny." — Ib.  iv.  4.  217. 
i.e.  "inevitable."     So 

"  We  see  the  very  wreck  that  we  must  suffer, 
And  unavoided  is  the  danger  now." — Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  268. 

"  With  all  imagined  (imaginable)  speed."— M.  ofV.  iii.  4.  52. 

"The  murmuring  surge 

That  on  the  unnumbered  idle  pebbles  chafes." — Lear,iv.6.21. 
So,  probably,  Theobald  is  right  in  reading 

"  The  twinn'd  stone  upon  th'  tt«««;;;&frV  beach," 

Cynib.  i.  6.  36, 
though  the  Globe  retains  "number'd." 

"  Unprized  "  in 

"This  unprized  precious  maid," — Lear,  i.  I.  262. 
may  mean  "  unprized  by  others,  but  precious  to  me." 


PARTICIPLES.  275 

"  There's  no  hoped  for  mercy  with  the  brothers." 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  35. 
i.ft  "to  be  hoped  for." 

It  has  been  conjectured  that  "delighted"  means    "capable  of 
being  delighted  "  in 

"  This  sensible  warm  motion  to  become 
A  kneaded  clod,  and  the  delighted  spirit 
To  bathe  in  fiery  floods."— M.  for  M.  iii.  I.  121. 

More  probably,  "delighted"  here  means  the  spirit  "  that  once  took 
its  delight  in  this  world;"  but  "kneads/"  seems  used  for  "  knead<z^/f. " 


376.  Participle  used  with  a  Nominative  Absolute.    In 

Anglo-Saxon  a  dative  absolute  was  a  common  idiom.  Hence,  even 
when  inflections  were  discarded,  the  idiom  was  retained ;  and  indeed, 
in  the  case  of  pronouns,  the  nominative,  as  being  the  normal  state  of 
the  pronoun,  was  preferred  to  its  other  inflections.  The  nominative 
absolute  is  much  less  common  with  us  than  in  Elizabethan  authors. 
It  is  often  used  to  call  attention  to  the  object  which  is  superfluously 
repeated.  Thus  in 

"  The  master  and  the  boatswain, 
Being  awake ',  enforce  them  to  this  place," — Temp.  v.  I.  100. 

there  is  no  need  of  "  them."     So  "he"  is  superfluous  in 

"  Why  should  he  then  protect  our  sovereign, 
He  being  of  age  to  govern  of  himself?" — 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  166. 

It  is  common  with  the  relative  and  relative  adverbs. 

"  Then  Deputy  of  Ireland  ;  who  removed, 
Earl  Surrey  was  sent  thither."— Hen.  VIII.  ii.  I.  42. 

"  My  heart, 

WJiere  the  impression  of  mine  eye  infixing, 
Contempt  his  scornful  perspective  did  lend  me. " 

A.  IV.  v.  3.  47. 
"  Thy  currish  spirit 

Govem'd  a  wolf,  who  hanged  for  human  slaughter, 
Even  from  the  gallows  did  his  fell  soul  fleet." 

M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  134. 
"  Emblems 

Laid  nobly  on  her  ;  which  perform? d,  the  choir 
Together  sung  •  Te  Deum. '"— Hen.  VIII.  iv.  i.  91. 

The    participle    with    a   nominative   originally   intended   to    be 
absolute  seems  diverted  into  a  subject  in 


276  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  The  king .  .  .  aiming  at  your  interior  hatred 

Makes  him  send."— Rich.  III.  I  3.  65-8. 
i.e.  "  the  fact  that  the  king  guesses  at  your  hatred  makes  him  send." 

377.  The  Participle  is  often  used  to  express  a  condition 

where,  for  perspicuity,  we  should  now  mostly  insert  "if." 

"  Requires  to  live  in  Egypt,  -which  not  granted, 

He  lessens  his  requests." — A.  and  C.  iii.  12.  12. 
"  That  whoso  ask'd  her  for  his  wife, 

His  riddle  told  not,  lost  his  life."—/',  of  T.  i.  Gower,  38. 
"  For  I  do  know  Fluellen  valiant, 

And,  touched  with  choler,  hot  as  gunpowder." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  188. 
' '  Your  honour  not  overthrown  by  your  desires, 

I  am  friend  to  them  and  you." — W.  T.  v.  I.  230. 

"'  Admitted  "  is  probably  a  participle  in 

"  This  is  the  brief  of  money,  plate  and  jewels 
I  am  possess'd  of:  'tis  exactly  valued, 
Not  petty  things  admitted."— A.  and  C.  v.  I.  146. 

i.e.  "exactly,  if  petty  things  be  excepted." 

The  participle  is  sometimes  so  separated  from  the  verb  that  it 
seems  to  be  used  absolutely. 

"  Resolve  me  with  all  modest  haste  which  way 
Thou  might'st  deserve,  or  they  impose  this  usage, 
Coming  from  us. " — Lear,  ii.  4.  27. 
i.e.  "since  thoti  comest." 

"  But  being  moody  give  him  line  and  scope." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  4.  39. 

"  And  "  is  sometimes  joined  to  a  participle  or  adjective  thus  used. 
See  And,  95- 

"  What  remains 

But  that  I  seek  occasion  how  to  rise, 
And  yet  the  king  not  privy  to  my  drift."— $Hen.  VI.  \.  2.  47. 

"  But  when  the  splitting  wind 
Makes  flexible  the  knees  of  knotted  oaks, 
And  flies  (being)  yW  under  shade."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  51. 
i.e.  "the  flies  also  being  (295)  fled." 

378.  Participle  Without  Noun.     This  construction  is  rare  in 
earlier  English. 


PARTICIPLES.  277 

"My  name  is  gret  and  mcrveylous,  treuly  you  telland."  —  Cov. 
My  st.  (Matzner). 

Here  again,  as  in  93,  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  constant  con- 
fusion between  the  infinitive,  the  present  participle,  and  the  verbal. 
In  the  above  example  we  should  expect  the  infinitive,  "  to  tell  you 
the  truth,"  and  perhaps  "telland"  is  not  exactly  used  for,  but 
confused  with,  "tellen."* 

It  is  still  a  usual  idiom  with  a  few  participles  which  are  employed 
almost  as  prepositions,  e.g.  "touching,"  "concerning,"  "respect- 
ing," "seeing."  "Judging"  is  also  often  thus  incorrectly  used, 
and  sometimes  "considering;"  but  we  could  scarcely  say  — 

"  Or  in  the  night  imagining  (if  one  imagines)  some  fear, 

How  easy  is  the  bush  suppos'd  a  bear."  —  M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  21. 
"  Here,  as  I  point  my  sword,  the  sun  arises, 
Which  is  a  great  way  growing  on  the  south, 
Weighing  the  youthful  season  of  the  year."  —  J.  C.  ii.  1.  108. 

Note  especially  — 

"  I  may  not  be  too  forward, 
Lest  (I)  being  seen  thy  brother,  tender  George, 
Be  executed."—  Rich.  III.  v.  3.  95. 

"  (It  must  be  done)  something  from  the  palace,  always  thought 
That  I  require  a  clearness."  —  Macbeth,  iii.  I.  132. 

i.e.    "  it  being  always  borne  in  mind." 

"  (Death  sits)  infusing  him  (man)  with  self  and  vain  conceit, 
And,  (man  having  been)  humour*  d  thus, 
(Death)  comes  at  the  last."  —  Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  168. 

This  use  is  common  in  prose. 

"  He  was  presently  suspected,  judging  (since  men  judged)  the  ill 
success  not  in  that  he  could  not,  but  ...  for  that  he  would  not.  "  — 
N.  /'.  182. 

So  "being,"  i.e.  "  it  being  the  fact,"  is  often  used  where  we  use 
4  '  seeing.  " 

"  You  loiter  here  too  long,  being  you  are  to  take  soldiers  up  in 
counties  as  you  go."—  2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  I.  200  ;  M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  51. 

"Though  I  with  death  and  with 
Reward  did  threaten  and  encourage  him, 
Not  doing  't  and  (it)  &•/«£•  done."  —  W.  T.  iii.  2.  166. 

•  It  would  be  interesting  to  trace  the  correspondine  process  in  French  by  which 
the  gerund  "dicendo"  and  the  participle  "dicens"  were  blended  in  "dis 


It  was  not  till  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  the  Academy  definitely 
pronounced  "  La  regie  est  faite.  On  nefera  plus  accorder  les  participcs  presents.  " 
but  from  the  earliest  times  the  d  of  the  gerund  became  t. 


278  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

i.e.  "I  threatened  him,  not  doing  it,  with  death,  and  encouraged 
him  with  reward,  (it)  being  done  ;"  a  specimen  of  irregular  terseness 
only  to  be  found  in  Elizabethan  authors  and  in  Mr.  Browning'* 
poems. 

The  context  often  suggests  a  noun  or  pronoun  : 

"  If  not  that,  I  being  queen,  you  bow  like  subjects, 
Yet  that,  (I  being)  by  you  deposed,  you  quake  like  rebels." 

Rich.  III.  i.  3.  162. 
"  But  her  eyes — 

How  could  he  see  to  do  them  ?     Having  made  one, 
Methinks  it  should  have  power  to  steal  both  his. " 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  125. 
t.f.  "  when  he  had  made  one." 

"Had,  having,  and  in  quest  to  have,  extreme."— Sonn.  129. 
i.e.  "when  an  object  is  had,  possessed,"  unless  it  is  still  more  irre- 
gularly used  for  "having  had." 

This  irregularity  is  perhaps  in  some  cases  explained  by  372. 

379.  Participle  with  Pronoun  implied.    Sometimes  a  pro- 
noun on  which  a  participle  depends  can  be  easily  understood  from 
a  pronominal  adjective.     Compare 

"  Nostros  vidistiyfc«/;>  ocellos." 

So        "  Not  helping,  death's  my  fee."— A.   W.  ii.  i.  192. 
i.e.  "death  is  the  fee  of  me  not  helping." 

"Men 

Can  counsel  speak  and  comfort  to  that  grief 
Which  they  themselves  not  feel ;  but,  tasting  it, 
Their  counsel  turns  to  passion." — M.  Ado,  v.  I.  22. 
"  She  dares  not  look,  yet,  winking,  there  appears 

Quick-shifting  antics  ugly  in  her  eye."— R.  of  L.  458. 
"  Coming  (as  we  came)  from  Sardis,  on  our  former  ensign 
Two  mighty  eagles  fell"— J.  C.  v.  I.  80. 

380.  Instead  of  the  Participle  an  Adjective  is  sometimes 

found. 

"  I  would  not  seek  an  absent  argument 

)f  my  revenge,  thou present."— A.  Y.  L.  iii.  i.  4. 
"  And  (she),  her  attendants  absent,  swallowed  fire.  "-J.  C.  iv.  3. 156. 
"  Joy  absent,  grief  is  present  for  that  time."— Rich.  II.  L  3.  259, 


ELLIPSES.  279 

Sometimes  the  adjective  depends  on  an  implied  pronoun  : 

"  Thy  word  is  current  with  him  for  my  death, 
But  di'ad,  thy  kingdom  cannot  buy  my  breath." 

Rich.  II.  i.  3.  232. 
;..-.  •'  the  breath  of  me  when  dead." 

"  It  is  an  obvious  conjecture  from  this  use  of  "absent,"  "present," 
"dead,"  that  their  quasi-participial  terminations  favoured  this  par- 
ticipial use.  But  add 

"  Thence, 
A  prosperous  south-wind  friendly,  we  have  cross'd." 

W.  T.  v.  I.  161. 

381.  The  Participle  is  sometimes  implied  in  the  case  of 

a  simple  word,  such  as  "being." 

"  I  have  heard  him  oft  maintain  it  to  be  fit  that  sons  (being)  at 
perfect  age  and  fathers  declining,  the  father  should  be  as  ward  to  the 
son."—  Lear,  i.  2.  77. 

"And  be  well  contented 

To  make  your  house  our  tower.      You  (being)  a  brother  of  us, 
It  fits  we  thus  proceed,  or  else  no  witness 
Would  come  against  you.  "—Hen.   VIII.  v.  I.  106. 

*.«.    "Since  you  are  our  brother."     (Or  (?)  "though  you  were  our 
brother,  it  [would  be  and]  is  fit  to  proceed  thus.") 

"  (Those  locks  are)  often  known 
To  be  the  dowry  of  a  second  head, 
The  skull  that  bred  them  (being)  in  the  sepulchre." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  96. 

We  retain  this  use  in  antithetical  phrases,  such  as  "face  to  face," 
"sword  against  sword,"  but  we  should  rarely  introduce  an  adjective 
into  such  an  antithetical  compound.     Shakespeare,  however,  has 
"And  answer  me  declined  sword  'gainst  sword." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  27. 

ELLIPSES. 

382.  Several  peculiarities  of  Elizabethan  language  have  already 
been  explained  by  the  desire  of   brevity  which  characterised  the 
authors  of  the  age.     Hence  arose  so  many  elliptical  expressions  that 
they  deserve  a  separate  treatment.     The  Elizabethan  authors  ob- 
jected to  scarcely  any  ellipsis,  provided  the  deficiency  could  be  easily 
supplied  from  the  context. 


28o  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Vouchsafe  (to  receive)  good-morrow  from  a  feeble  tongue." 

7.  C.  ii.  I.  313. 
"When  shall  we  see  (one  another)  again?' 

Cymb.  i.  i.  124 ;  Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  4.  59. 
Just  so  we  still  use  "meet." 

"You  and  I  have  known  (one  another),  sir." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  6.  86 ;   Cymb.  i.  4.  36. 

"  On  their  sustaining  garments  (there  is)  not  a  blemish, 
But  (the  garments  are)  fresher  than  before." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  219. 

Thus  also,  as  in  Latin,  a  verb  of  speaking  can  be  omitted  where 
it  is  implied  either  by  some  other  word,  as  in 
"  She  calls  me  proud,  and  (says)  that 

She  could  not  love  me."— A.  Y.  L.  iv.  3.  16. 
"  But  here's  a  villain  that  would  face  me  down 
He  met  me  on  the  mart." — C.  of  E.  iii.  I.  7. 

i.e.  "maintain  to  my  face  that  he  met  me;"  or  by  a  question  as  in 

"What  are  you? 

(I  ask)  Your  name  and  quality ;  and  why  you  answer 
This  present  summons." — Lear,  v.  3.  120. 

(The  Globe  inserts  a  note  of  interrogation  after  quality.) 

"  Enforce  him  with  his  envy  to  the  people, 
And  (say)  that  the  spoil  got  on  the  Antiates 
Was  ne'er  distributed."— CVr/0/.  iii.  3.  4. 

Thus,  by  implying  from  "forbid"  a  word  of  speaking,  "bid,"  and 
not  by  a  double  negative,  we  should  perhaps  explain 

"  You  may  as  well  forbid  the  mountain  pines 
To  wag  their  high  tops  and  (bid  them)  to  make  no  noise.'1 

M.  cf  V.  iv.  I.  76. 

Thus     "  I  know  not  whether  to  depart  in  silence 
Or  bitterly  to  speak  in  your  reproof 
Best  fitteth  my  degree  or  your  condition. 
If  (I  thought  it  fittest)  not  to  answer,   you  might  haply 
think,"  8tc.—Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  144. 

After  "O  !"  "alas  !"  and  other  exclamations,  a  verb  of  surprise 
or  regret  is  sometimes  omitted. 

"  0  (it  is  pitiful)  that  deceit  should  steal  such  gentle  shapes." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  27. 
"Good    God!     (I   marvel   that)   these   nobles   should   such 

stomachs  bear : 
I  myself  fight  not  once  in  forty  year." — I  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  90. 


ELLIPSES.  281 

Sometimes  no  exclamation  is  inserted  : 

"  Ask  what  thou  wilt.    (I  would)  That  I  had  said  and  done. " 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  31. 

Ellipses  in  Conjunctional  Sentences.    The  Elizabethans 

seem  to  have  especially  disliked  the  repetition  which  is  now  con- 
sidered necessary,  in  the  latter  of  two  clauses  connected  by  a  relative 
or  a  conjunction. 

383.  And: 

"  Have  you 

Ere  no\r  denied  the  asker,  and  now  again 
Of  him  that  did  not  ask  but  mock  (do  you)  bestow 
Your  sued-for  tongues?" — Coriol.  ii.  3.  213. 

Here  in  strictness  we  ought  to  have  "bestowed,"  or  "do  you 
bestow." 

An  ellipse  must  be  supplied  proleptically  in 

"  (Beggars)  Sitting  in  the  stocks  refuge  their  shame, 
That  (i.e.   because)  many  have   (sat),   and  many  must  sit 

there." — Rich.  II.  v.  5.  27. 
"Of  (such)  dainty  and  such  picking  grievances." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  198. 
"It  (i.e.  love)  shall  be  (too)  sparing  and  loo  full  of  riot." 

V.  and  A.  1147. 
"It  shall  be  (too)  merciful  and  too  severe." — Ib.  1155. 

384.  As : 

"  His  ascent  is  not  so  easyaj  (the  ascent  of)  those  who,"  &c. 

Coriol.  ii.  2.  30, 

"  Returning  were  as  tedious  as  (to)  go  o'er." — Macb.  iii.  4.  138. 
"  They  boldly  press  so  far  as  (modern  Eng.  that]  further  none 
(press)." — B.  J.  Cy.'s  Rev.  v.  3. 

"  O,  'tis  sweating  labour 
To  bear  such  idleness  so  near  the  heart 
As  Cleopatra  (bears)  this." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  95. 
"  And  I,  that  haply  take  them  from  him  now, 
May  yet  ere  night  yield  both  my  life  and  them 
To  some  man  else,  as  this  dead  man  doth  (to)  me." 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  60. 
"  Return  those  duties  back  as  (they)  are  most  fit  (to  be  returned)." 

Lear,  i.  I.  99. 
As  can  scarcely,  in  the  above,  be  taken  for  "which." 


2$2  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"This  is  a  strange  thing  (as  strange)  as  e'er  I  look'd  on." 

Temp.  v.  i.  289. 

385.  But  (after  but  the  finite  verb  is  to  be  supplied  -without  the 
negative) : 

"The  tender  nibbler  would  not  take  the  bait 
But  (would)  smile  and  jest."— P.  P.  4. 

"To  be  thus  is  nothing, 
But  to  be  safely  thus  (is  something)." — Macbeth,  iii.  i.  47. 

"And  though  I  could 

With  barefaced  power  sweep  him  from  my  sight 
And  bid  my  will  avouch  it,  yet  I  must  not, 
(For  certain  friends  that  are  both  his  and  mine, 
Whose  loves  I  may  not  drop,)  but  (I  must)  wail  his  fall 
Who  I  myself  struck  down." — Macbeth,  iii.  I.  119. 
Sometimes  but  itself  is  omitted  : 

"'Tis  not  my  profit  that  doth  lead  mine  honour, 
(But  it  is)  Mine  honour  (that  doth  lead)  it  (i.e.  profit)." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  7.  83. 

Sometimes  the  repeated  varies  slightly  from  the  original  propo- 
sition : 

"'Tis  not  enough  to  help  the  feeble  up, 

But  (it  is  necessary)  to  support  him  after." — T.  of  A.  i.  1. 107. 

In  the  following,  the  negative  is  implied  in  the  first  verb  through 

t/ie  question,  "Why  need  we?"  i.e.  "We  need  not."     The  second 

verb  must  not  be  taken  interrogatively,  and  thus  it  omits  the  negative. 

"  Why,  what  need  we 

Commune  with  you  of  this,  but  rather  follow 
Our  forceful  indignation?" — W.  T.  ii.  I.  162. 

i.e.  "Why  need  we  commune  with  you?  we  need  rather  follow  our 
own  impulse."  Else,  if  both  verbs  be  taken  interrogatively,  "  but  " 
must  be  taken  as  "and  not :"  "  Why  need  we  commune  with  you, 
and  not  follow  our  own  impulse  ?" 

Where  the  negative  is  part  of  the  subject,  as  in  "none,"  a  new 
.subject  must  be  supplied  : 

"  God,  I  pray  him 

That  none  of  you  may  live  your  natural  age 
But  (each  of  you)  by  some  unlook'd  accident  cut  off." 

Rich.  I II.  i.  3.  214. 

386.  Ere: 

"The  rabble  should  have  first  unroof'd  the  city 
Ere  (they  should  have)  so  prevail' d  with  me." — Coriol.  i.  r.  222. 


ELLIPSES.  *S$ 

"  I'll  lean  upon  one  crutch  and  fight  with  the  other 
li.rc  (i  will)  stay  behind  this  business." — Coriol.  i.  I.  246. 

387.  If: 

"I  am  more  serious  than  my  custom  ;  you 
Must  be  so  too,  if  (you  must  or  intend  to)  heed  me." 

Temp.  ii.  I.  220. 
See  "must,"  314. 

"  I  yet  beseech  your  majesty 

If  (it  is)  for  (i.e.  because)  I  want  that  glib  and  oily  art 
.  .  .  That  you  make  known,"  &c. — Lear,  i.  I.  227. 

"  O,  if  (you  be)  a  virgin 

And  your  affection  (be)  not  gone  forth,  I'll  make  you 
The  queen  of  Naples." — Tempest,  i.  2.  447-8. 
"  Haply  you  shall  not  see  me  more,  or  //(you  see  me), 
(You  will  see  me)  A  mangled  shadow.  — A.  andC.  iv.  I.  27. 

This  is  a  good  Greek  idiom.     So 

"  Not  like  a  corse  :  or  if,  not  to  be  buried, 
But  quick,  and  in  mine  arms." — W.  T.  iv.  4.  131. 

In  the  following  hypothetical  sentence  there  is  a  curious  ellipsis  : 
"  Love,  loving  not  itself,  none  other  can. " — Rick.  II.  v.  2.  88. 
i.e.  "  if  a  man  does  not  love  his  own  flesh  and  blood  he  cannot  (love) 
a  stranger." 

388.  Like  (i.e.  resembling) : 

"But  you  like  none,  none  (like)  you,  for  constant  heart." — Sonn. 

388a,  Or: 

"  For  women's  fear  and  love  holds  quantity  ; 
In  neither  (is)  aught,  or  (it  is)  in  extremity." 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  178. 

i.e.    "  women's  fear  and  love  vary  together,  are  proportionable:  they 
either  contain  nothing,  or  what  they  contain  is  in  extremes." 

389.  Since: 

"  Be  guilty  of  my  death  since  (thou  art  guilty)  of  my  crime." 

R.  of  L. 

390.  Than: 

"To  see  sad  sights  moves  more  than  (to)  hear  them  told." 

*.<//,.  451. 


284  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

**  It  cost  more  to  get  than  (was  fit)  to  lose  in  a  day."* 

B.  J.  Poetaster. 

"  Since  I  suppose  we  are  made  to  be  no  stronger 
Than  (that)  faults  may  shake  our  frames." 

M.forM.  ii.  4. 133. 

"But  I  am  wiser  than  (I  should  be  were  I)  to  serve  their 
precepts." — B.  J.  E.  out  &*c.  i.  I. 

"  My  form 

Is  yet  the  cover  of  a  fairer  mind 
Than  (that  which  is  fit)  to  be  butcher  of  an  innocent  child. " 

K.  J.  iv.  2.  258. 

"  This  must  be  known  ;  which  being  kept  close  might  move 
More  grief  to  hide,  than  hate  to  utter  (would  move)  love." 

Hamlet,  i.  I.  108-9. 

i.e.  "this  ought  to  be  revealed,  for  it  (273),  by  being  suppressed, 
might  excite  more  grief  in  the  king  and  queen  by  the  hiding  (356) 
of  the  news,  than  our  unwillingness  to  tell  bad  news  would  excite 
love. " 

"  What  need  we  any  spur  but  our  own  cause 
To  prick  us  to  redress  ?  What  other  bond 
Than  (that  of)  secret  Romans?"—^  C.  ii.  i.  125. 

As  in  the  case  of  "but  "  (385),  so  in  the  following,  the  verb  must 
be  repeated  without  its  negative  force  : 

"  I  heard  you  say  that  you  had  rather  refuse 
The  offer  of  an  hundred  thousand  crowns 
Thau  (have)  Bolingbroke's  return  to  England. " 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  17. 

Here,  perhaps,  the  old  use  of  the  subjunctive  "had"  for  "would 
have  "  exerts  some  influence. 

The  word  "rather"  must  be  supplied  from  the  termination  er  in 

"  The  rarer  action  is 

In  virtue  (rather)  than  in  vengeance." — Temp.  v.  I.  28. 
"  Yeu  are  well  understood  to  be  a  perfects  giber  for  the  table 
than  a  necessary  bencher  in  the  Capitol." — Coriol.  ii.  I.  91. 

391.  Though : 

"  Saints  do  not  more,  though  (saints)  grant  for  prayers'  sake." 

R.  and  J.  i.  5.  107. 

"  I  keep  but  two  men  and  a  boy  (as)  yet,  till  my  mother  be  dead. 
But  what  though ?     Yet  I  live  like  a  poor  gentleman  lorn." 

M.   W.  of  W.  i.  I.  287. 

*  Compare  the  Greek  idiom. — Jelft  ii.  863.  2.  2. 


ELLIPSES.  285 

392.  Till : 

"  He  will  not  hear  till  (he)  feel."—/:  of  A.  ii.  2.  7. 

393.  Too  ....  to : 

"  His  worth  is  too  well  known  (for  him)  to  be  forth-coming." 

B.  J.  E.  out  &c.  v.  I. 

394.  Relative.     (In  relative  sentences  the  preposition  is  often 
not  repeated. ) 

"  Most  ignorant  of  what  he's  most  assured  (ot)." 

M.for  M.  ii.  2.  119. 

"A  gift  of  all  (of  which}  he  dies  possessed. " — M.  of  V*  iv.  1. 389. 
"  Err'd  in  this  point  (in)  which  now  you  censure  him." 

M.forM.ii.  I.  15. 
"  For  that  (for)  which,  if  myself  might  be  his  judge, 

He  should  receive  his  punishment  in  thanks." — Ib.  4.  28. 
"  I  do  pronounce  him  in  that  very  shape 

(In  -which]  He  shall  appear  in  proof. "—Hen.  VIII. i.  1. 196. 
"  As  well  appeareth  by  the  cause  (for  which}  you  come." 

Rich.  II.  i.  i.  26. 

"  In  this  (in  or  of)  which  you  accuse  her." — W.  T.  ii.  I.  133. 
"  In  that  behalf  (in)  which  we  have  challenged  it." 

K.  J.  ii.  i.  264. 
"  To  die  upon  the  bed  (upon  which]  my  father  died." 

W.  T.  iv.  4.  466. 
"  In  such  a  cause  as  fills  mine  eyes  with  tears, 

And  stops  my  tongue  while  (my}  heart  is  drown'd  in  cares." 

3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  14. 
There  is  a  proleptic  omission  in 

"  Or  (upon)  whom  frown 'st  thou  that  I  do  fawn  upon." 

Sonn.  149. 

395.  Antithetical  Sentences  frequently  do   not   repeat   pro- 
nouns, verbs,  &c. 

"  What  most  he  should  dislike  seems  pleasant  to  him, 

What  (he  should)  like,  (seems)  offensive." — Lear,  iv.  2.  10. 

Sometimes  the  verb  has  to  be  repeated  in  a  different  tense. 

"  To  know  our  enemies'  minds  we 'Id  rip  their  hearts: 

(To  rip)  Their  papers  is  more  lawful." — Lear,  iv.  6.  266. 
"  To  be  acknowledg'd,  madam,  is  (to  be)  overpaid." 

Ib.  iv.  7.  4. 


?86  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

The  antithesis  often  consists  in  the  opposition  between  past  and 
present  time. 

"  I  meant  to  rectify  my  conscience,  which 
I  then  did  feel  full  sick,  and  yet  (do  feel)  not  well." 

Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  204. 

"  And  may  that  soldier  a  mere  recreant  prove 
That  means  not  (to  be),  hath  not  (been),  or  is  not  in  love." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  288. 

"  She  was  beloved,  she  lowed;  she  is  (beloved)  and  doth  (love)." 

Ib.  iv.  $.  292. 

396.  Ellipsis  of  Neither  before  Nor,  One  before  Other. 

"  (Neither)  He  nor  that  affable  familiar  ghost." — Sonn.  86. 
"  But  (neither)  my  five  wits  nor  my  five  senses  can 

Dissuade  one  foolish  heart  from  seeing  thee." — Ib.  141. 
"  A  thousand  groans  .  .  . 

Came  (one)  on  another's  neck." — Ib.  131. 
"  Pomp.  You  will  not  bail  me  then,  sir. 

Lucio.  (Neither)  Then,  Pompey,  nornow." 

M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  86. 

397.  Ellipsis  of  Adverbial  and  other  Inflections. 

"  The  duke  of  Norfolk  sprightfully  and  bold(ly)." 

Rich.  II.  i.  3.  3. 

"  Good  gentlemen,  look  fresh(ly)  and  merrily."— J.  C.  ii.  i.  223. 
"  Apt(ly)  and  willingly."—  T.  N.  v.  I.  135. 
"  With  sleided  silk,  feat(ly)  and  affectedly."— Z.  C.  48. 
"  His  grace  looks  cheerfully  and  smooth(ly)  this  morning." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4.  50. 
"  And  she  will  speak  most  bitterly  and  strange(ly)." 

M.forM.  v.  i.  36. 
''  How  honourable(y)  and  how  kindly  we 

Determine.'' — A.  and  C.  v.  I.  58. 

"And  that  so  lamely  and  unfashionable(y). " — Rich.  III.  i.  I.  22. 
It  will  not  escape  notice  (i)  that  in  all  but  two  of  these  instances 
the  -ly  is  omitted  after  monosyllabic  adjectives,  which  can  be  more 
readily  used  as  adverbs  without  change;  (2)  that  "honourable," 
"  unfashionable,"  &c.,  in  their  old  pronunciation  would  approximate 
to  "honourably,"  "  unfashionably,"  and  the  former  is  itself  used  as 
an  adverb.  (See  I.)  Nevertheless  it  seems  probable  that  this,  like 
the  following  idiom,  and  like  many  others,  arises  partly  from  the 
readiness  with  which  a  compound  phrase  connected  by  a  conjunction 
is  regarded  as  one  and  inseparable.  Compare 


ELLIPSES.  2^87 

"  Until  her  husband('s)  and  my  lord's  return." — M.  ofV.  iii.  4.  30. 
"  As  soul('s)  and  body's  severing." — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  3.  16. 
\vhcre  "  soul-and-body  "  is  a  quasi-noun. 

"  Shall  be  your  love('s)  and  labour's  recompense." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  62. 

398.  Ellipsis  of  Superlative  Inflection. 

"  The  generous  and  gravest  citizens. " — M.  for  M.  iv.  6.  13. 
"  Only  the  grave  and  wisest  of  the  land." — HEYWOOD  (Walker). 
"The  soft  and  sweetest  music. "— B.  J.  (Ib. ). 
"  The  vain  and  haughtiest  minds  the  sun  e'er  saw." 

GOFFE  (/£.). 

"  To  mark  the/«//-fraught  man  and  best  endued. " 

Hen.   V.  ii.  2.  139. 

"The  humble  as  the  proudest  sail  doth  bear." — Sonn.  80. 
The  tst  of  the  second  adjective  modifies  the  first. 
Reversely  we  have — 

"The  best  condition'd  and  unwearied  spirit,"—  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  295. 
where  "  best"  modifies  the  second  adjective. 

"  Call  me  the  horrid 'st  and  unhallow'd  thing 

That  life  and  nature  tremble  at." — MIDULETON  (Walker). 
In     "I  took  him  for  the  plainest  harmless  creature," 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4.  25. 

though  the  meaning  may  be  "the  plainest,  (the  most)  harmless 
creature,"  it  is  more  likely  a  compound  word,  "plainest-harmless" 
(see  2). 

3§9.  Ellipsis  Of  Nominative.  Where  there  can  be  no  doubt 
what  is  the  nominative,  it  is  sometimes  omitted. 

"It  was  upon  this  fashion  bequeathed  me  by  will,  but  poor  a 
thousand  crowns,  and  as  thou  sayest  charged  my  brother,  on  his 
blessing,  to  breed  me  well." — A.  Y.  L.  i.  I.  3. 

"  They  call  him  Doricles  :  and  boasts  himself 

To  have  a  worthy  feeding." — W.   T.  iv.  4.  168. 
"  \Vho  loved  her  so,  that  speaking  of  her  foulness 

(He)  Washed  it  with  tears."*— M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  156. 
"  (It)  shall  not  be  long  but  I'll  be  here  again." 

Macbeth,  iv.  2.  23. 
"  Xor  do  we  find  him  forward  to  be  sounded, 

But  with  a  crafty  madness  keeps  aloof." — Hamlet,  iii.  I.  8. 
"That"  might  (but  for,  260)  be  treated  as  a  relative  pronoun. 


288  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

This  explains  K.  J.  ii.  I.  571,  and 

"  When  I  am  very  sure,  if  they  should  speak, 
(They)  Would  almost  damn  those  ears  which,"  &c. 

M.  of  V.  i.  i.  97. 
Compare 

"  Come,  fortune's  a  jade,  I  care  not  who  tell  her, 
(Who,  i.e.  since  she)  Would  offer  to  strangle  a  page  of  the 
cellar."— B.  and  F. 

"  The  king  must  take  it  ill 
That  he's  so  slightly  valued  in  his  messenger, 
(That  he  or  ? you]  Should  have  him  thus  restrained." 

Lear,  ii.  2.  154.> 
So  Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  197. 

The  following  might  be  explained  by  transposition,  "  may  all"  for 
"all  may  :"  but  more  probably  "they"  is  implied  : 

"  That  he  awaking  when  the  other  do, 
May  all  to  Athens  back  again  repair." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  72.     See  also  Ib.  v.  i.  98. 

400.  The  omission  of  the  Nominative  is  most  common 

with  "has,"  "is,"  "was,"  &c. 

"  He  has"  is  frequently  pronounced  and  sometimes  written  "has," 
and  "he"  easily  coalesces  with  "was,"*  "will,"  &c.  Hence  these 
cases  should  be  distinguished  from  those  in  the  preceding  paragraph. 

"  And  to  the  skirts  of  this  wild  wood  he  came, 
Where,  meeting  with  an  old  religious  man, 
After  some  question  with  him  was  converted." 

A.  Y.  L.  v.  4;  167. 

"This  young  gentlewoman  had  a  father  whose  skill  was  almost  as 
great  as  his  honesty  :  had  it  stretch'd  so  far,  -would  have  made  nature 
immortal." — A.  W.\.\.  20. 

"  Hero.    I'll  wear  this. 

Marg.  By  my  troth,  Js  not  so  good." — M.  Ado,  iii.  4.  9  and  18. 

"  For  Cloten 

There  wants  no  diligence  in  seeking  him, 
And  (he)  will  no  doubt  be  found." — Cymb.  iv.  3.  21. 
"  For  I  do  know  Fluellen  valiant. 

And,  touch'd  with  choler,  hot  as  gunpowder  ; 
And  quickly  will  return  an  injury." — Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  188. 
1  This  is  that  banish'd  haughty  Montague, 
And  here  if  come." — R.  and  J.  v.  3.  52. 
*  See  461. 


ELLIPSES.  289 

"As  for  Cromwell, 

Beside  that  of  the  jewel-house,  (he)  is  made  master 
( )'  the  rolls."— Hen.  VIII.  v.  i.  34  ;  50. 
"  I  know  the  gentleman  ;  and,  ns  you  say, 

There  (he)  was  a'  gaming." — Hamlet,  ii.  I.  58. 
"  Bring  him  forth  ;  has  sat  in  the  stocks  all  night,"  &c. 

A.  IV.  iv.  3.  116. 
So  Ib.  114,  298  ;   T.  N.  i.  5.  156. 

"  'Tis  his  own  blame:  hath  put  himself  from  rest." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  293. 

Ib.  iii.  i.  5;    Othello,  iii.  i.  67;   T.  of  A.  iii.  2.  39,  iii.  3.  23,  iv. 
3.  463.     This  omission  is  frequent  after  appellatives  or  oaths. 

"  Poor  jade,  is  wrung  in  the  withers  out  of  all  'cess." 

I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  i.  6. 

"  Poor fellow,  never  joyed  since  the  price  of  oats  rose." — Ib.  11. 
"  Richard.  Send  for  some  of  them. 

/•/r.     Marry,  and  will,  my  lord,  with  all  my  heart." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4.  36. 

In     "And  the  fair  soul  herself, 

Weigh'd  between  loathness  and  obedience,  at 

Which  end  o*  the  beam  should  bow," — Tempest,  ii.  I.  131. 

either  "she"  is  omitted,  or  "should"  is  for  "she  would,"  or  "  o'  " 

has  been  inserted  by  mistake. 

401.  A  Nominative  in  the  second  person  plural  or  first  person 
is  less  commonly  omitted. 

"They  all  rush  by 
And  leave  you  hindermost ; 
Or  like  a  gallant  horse,  fall'n  in  first  rank, 
(You)  Lie  there  for  pavement  to  the  abject  rear." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  162. 
"  They  .  .  .  gave  me  cold  looks, 
And,  meeting  here  the  other  messenger, 
Having  more  man  than  wit  about  me,  (I)  drew." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  4'J. 

The  /  before  "  pray  thee,"  "beseech  thee,"  is  constantly  omitted. 
( 1 'cm pest,  ii.  I.  1.) 

"  Good-morrow,  fair  ones  ; 
(I)  pray  you  if  you  know." — A.   Y.  L.  iv.  3.  76. 

i.e.  "  I  ask  you  whether  you  know." 

The  inflection  of  the  second  person  singular  allows  the  nominative 
to  be  readily  understood,  and  therefore  justifies  its  omission. 

u 


290  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Art  any  more  than  a  steward?"—^  N.  ii.  3.  122. 

"It  was  she 

First  told  me  thou  wast  mad ;  then  (thovO  earnest  in  smiling. " 

It.  v.  i.  357. 

402.  Ellipsis  of  Nominative  explained.    This  ellipsis  of 

the  nominative  may  perhaps  be  explained  partly  (i)  by  the  lingering 
sense  of  inflections,  which  of  themselves  are  sometimes  sufficient  to 
indicate  the  person  of  the  pronoun  understood,  as  in  Milton — 

"Thou  art  my  son  beloved  :  in  him  am  pleased  ;" 
partly  (2)  by  the  influence  of  Latin  ;   partly  (3)  by  the  rapidity  of 
the  Elizabethan  pronunciation,  which  frequently  changed  "he"  into 
"  'a"  (a  change  also  common  in  E.  E.), 

"  'a  must  needs," — 2  Hen.   VI.  iv.  2.  59. 

and  prepared  the  way  for  dropping  "he"  altogether.     Thus  perhaps 

in          "Who  if  alive  and  ever  dare  to  challenge  this  glove,  I  have 

sworn  to  take  him  a  box  o'  th'  ear," — Hen.  V.  iv.  7.  132. 

we  should  read  "  'a  live  and  ever  dare."  In  the  French  of  Rabelais 
the  pronouns  are  continually  dropped  :  but  the  fuller  inflections  in 
French  render  the  omission  less-  inconvenient  than  in  English.  In 
the  following  instance  there  is  an  ambiguity  which  is  only  removed 
by  the  context  : — 

"We  two  saw  you  four  set  on  four;  and  (you)  bound  them 
and  were  masters  of  their  wealth." — I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  4.  278. 

403.  Ellipsis  of  it  is,  There  is,  Is. 

"  So  beauty  blemish'd  once  (is)  for  ever  lost." — P.  P.  13. 
"  I  cannot  give  guess  how  near  (it  is)  to  day." — J.  C.  ii.  I.  2. 

"  Seldom  (is  it)  when 
The  steeled  gaoler  is  the  friend  of  men." 

M.  for  M.  iv.  2.  90. 
"And  (it  is)  wisdom 

To  offer  up  a  weak  poor  innocent  lamb." — Macb.  iv.  3.  16. 
"  Since  [there  is  neither  (163)]  brass  nor  stone  nor  earth  nor 

boundless  sea, 

But  sad  mortality  o'ersways  their  power." — Sonn.  64. 
"'Tis  certain,  every  man  that  dies  ill,  the  ill  (is)  upon  his 
own  head."— Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  197. 
"  Many  years, 

Though  Cloten  (was)  then  but  young,  you  see,  not  wore  him 
From  my  remembrance." — Cymb.  iv.  4.  23. 


ELLIPSES,  291 

So  lien.  V,  iv.  7.  132  (quoted  in  402),  if  the  text  be  retained. 
It  is  a  question  whether  "are"  is  omitted,  or  whether  (less  pro- 
bably) (And,  95)  "  and  "  is  used  for  "  also  "  with  a  nom.  absolute,  in 

"  But  'tis  not.  so  above  ; 
There  is  no  shuffling,  there  the  action  lies 
In  his  true  nature  :  and  we  ourselves  (?  are)  compelled 
To  give  in  evidence." — Hamlet,  iii.  3-62;   T.  N.  i.  I.  38; 

Hen.  V.  i.  i.  57. 

"  Which  I  did  store  to  be  my  foster-nurse, 
When  service  should  in  my  old  limbs  lie  lame, 
And  unregarded  age  (?  should  be)  in  corners  thrown." 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  2.  42. 

As  the  verb  is  omitted  by  us  constantly  after  "whatever,"  e.g. 
"anything  whatever,"  so  Shakespeare  could  write, 

"  Beyond  all  limit  of  what  else  (is)  in  the  world." 

Temp.  iii.  i.  172. 

Thus  also  "  however"  is  for  "  however  it  may  be,"  i.e.  "  in  any 
case  : " 

"  If  haply  won  perhaps  a  hapless  gain  ; 
If  lost,  why  then  a  grievous  labour  won  ; 
However  (it  be),  but  a  folly  bought  with  wit." 

T.  G.  of  V.  i.  i.  34. 

We  have  passed  in  the  use  of  "however"  from  the  meaning  "in 
spite  of  what  may  Jiappcn  in  the  future"  to  "in  spite  of  what 
happened  in  the/oj/,"  i.e.  "nevertheless." 

"There  is"  is  often  omitted  with  "no  one  but,"  as 

"  (There  is)  no  one  in  this  presence 
But  his  red  colour  hath  forsook  his  cheeks." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  I.  84. 
"  Who  is"  (244)  is  omitted  in 

"  Here's  a  young  maid  (who  is)  with  travel  much  oppressed, 
And  faints  for  succour." — A.   Y.  L.  ii.  4.  75. 

Otherwise  the  nominative  (399)  is  omitted  before  "faints." 

404.  Ellipsis  of  it  and  There. 

"  Whose  wraths  to  guard  you  from, 
Which  here  in  this  most  desolate  isle  else  falls 
Upon  your  head,  (there)  is  nothing  but  heart -sorrow, 
And  a  clear  life  ensuing." — Temp.  iii.  2.  82. 
"  Satisfaction  (there)  can  be  none  but  by  pangs  of  death." 

T.  N.  iii.  4.  2tU. 

U    2 


292  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  D.  Pedro.  What !  sigh  for  the  toothache? 
Leon.      Where  (there)  is  but  a  humour  or  a  worm." 

M.  Ado,  iii.  2.  27  ;  Ib.  ii.  2.  20. 

"  At  the  Elephant  (it)  is  best  to  lodge."—  T.  N.  iii.  3.  40. 
"  Be  (it)  what  it  \&"—Cymb.  v.  4.  149. 
"  The  less  you  meddle  with  them  the  more  (it)  is  for  your 

honesty."— M.  Ado,  iii.  3.  56. 
The  omission  is  common  before  "please." 

"  So  please  (it)  him  (to)  come  unto  this  place."—  J.  C.  iii.  1. 140. 
"  Is  (/'/)  then  unjust  to  each  his  due  to  give  ?" 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  9.  38. 
"  (ft)  remains 

That  in  the  official  marks  invested  you 
Anon  do  meet  the  Senate." — Coriol.  ii.  3.  147. 

This  construction  is  quite  as  correct  as  our  modern  form  with 
"it."  The  sentence  "That  in.  ...  Senate,"  is  the  subject  to 
"  remains."  So — 

"And  that  in  Tarsus  (it)  was  not  best 

Longer  for  him  to  make  his  rest." — Pericl.  ii.  Gower,  25. 
"  Happiest  of  all  is  (it  or  this),  that  her  gentle  spirit 

Commits  itself  to  you  to  be  directed." — M.  ofV.  iii.  2.  16C. 

We  see  how  unnecessary  and  redundant  our  modern  "  it"  is  from 
the  following  passage  : — 

"  Unless  self-charity  be  sometimes  a  vice, 
And  to  defend  ourselves  /'/  be  a  sin." — Othello,  ii.  3.  203. 

This  is  (if  the  order  of  the  words  be  disregarded)  as  good  English  as 
our  modern  "  Unless  it  be  a  sin  to  defend  ourselves."  The  fact  is, 
this  use  of  the  modern  "it"  is  an  irregularity  only  justified  by  the 
clearness  which  it  promotes.  "It"  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence 
calls  attention  to  the  real  subject  which  is  to  follow.  "//  is  a  sin, 
viz.  to  defend  oneself." 

The  sentence  is  sometimes  placed  as  the  object,  "it"  being 
omitted. 

"  But  long  she  thinks  (it)  till  he  return  again."— R.  of  L.  454. 

"Being"  is  often  used  for  "it  being,"  or  "being  so,"  very  much 
like  Sv  and  its  compounds  in  Greek. 

"  That  Lepidus  of  the  triumvirate 
Should  be  deposed  ;  and,  (it)  being  (so),  that  we  detain 
All  his  revenue." — A.  and  C.  iii.  6.  30. 


ELLIPSES.  293 

"  I  learn  you  take  things  ill  which  are  not  so 
Or,  being  (so),  concern  you  not." — A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  30. 

405.  Ellipses  after  will  and  is. 

"I  wi//,"  i.e.  "I  purpose,"  when  followed  by  a  preposition  of 
motion,  might  naturally  be  supposed  to  mean  "  I  purpose  motion. " 
Hence,  as  we  have 

"lie purposeth  to  Athens,"—^,  and  C.  iii.  I.  35. 
so        "777  to  him."— X.  and  J.  iii.  2.  141. 
"  Will  yovL  along?" — Coriol.  ii.  3.  157. 
"Now  we'7/  together. "—Macbeth,  iv.  3.  136. 

"  I  will  to-morrow, 

And  betimes  I  will,  to  the  weird  sisters." — Ib.  iii. 4. 133. 
"  Strange  things  I  have  in  head  that  will  to  hand." 

Ib.  iii.  4.  139. 
Compare 

"Give  these  fellows  some  means  (of  access)  to  the  king." 

Hamlet,  iv.  6.  13. 
Similarly,  as  we  have 

"I  must  (go)  to  Coventry."— /?/f/fc.  77.  i.  2.  56. 
"  I  must  (go)  a  dozen  mile  to-night." — 2  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  310. 
so     "And  he  to  England  shall  along  with  you." — Hamlet,  iii.  3.  4. 
We  still  say,  "  He  is  (journeying)  for  Paris,"  but  not 

"  He  is  (ready)  for  no  gallants'  company  without  them." 

B.  J.  E.  out  &c.  i.  I. 
"Any  ordinary  groom  is  (fit)  for  such  payment." 

Hen.  VIII.  v.  I.  174. 
So  T.  N.  iii.  3.  46  ;  A.  IV.  iii.  6.  109. 

"  I  am  (bound)  to  thank  you  for  it."— 7*.  of  A.  i.  2.  111. 
Such  an  ellipsis  explains 

' '  Run  from  her  guardage  to  the  sooty  bosom 
Of  such  a  thing  as  thou,  (a  thing  Jit)  to  fear  (act.\  not  to 

delight."—  Othello,  i.  2.  71. 

Again,  we  might  perhaps  say,  "This  is  not  a  sky  (fit)  to  walk 
under,"  but  not 

"  This  sky  is  not  (fit)  to  walk  in."— J.  C.  i.  3.  39. 
The  modern  distinction  in  such  phrases  appears  to  be  this  :  when 
the  noun  follows  is,  there  is  an  ellipse  of  "fit,"  "worthy:"  when 
the  noun  precedes  is,  there  is  an  ellipse  of  "intended,"  "made." 


294  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Thus  :  "  this  is  a  book  to  read"  means  "  this  is  a  book  worthy  to 
read;"  but,  "this  book  is  to  read  and  not  to  tear,"  means  "this 
book  is  intended  or  made  for  the  purpose  of  reading."  This  dis- 
tinction was  not  recognized  by  the  Elizabethans.  When  we  wish  to 
express  "worthy"  elliptically,  we  insert  a:  "He  is  a  man  to  re- 
spect," or  we  use  the  passive,  and  say,  "He  is  to  be  respected." 
Shakespeare  could  have  written  "He  is  to  respect"  in  this  sense. 
The  Elizabethans  used  the  active  in  many  cases  where  we  should 
use  the  passive.  Thus — 

"Little  is  to  do."— Macbeth,  v.  7.  28. 

"What's  more  to  do."—Ib.  v.  8.   64;   A.  and  C.  ii.  6.  60; 

y.  C.  iii.  I.  26 ;  2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  3. 

Hence  "This  food  is  not  to  eat"  might  in  Shakespeare's  time  have 
meant  "This  food  is  not  fit  to  eat;"  now,  it  could  only  mean  "in- 
tended to  eat."  Similarly  "videndus"  in  Cicero  meant  "one 
who  ought  to  be  seen,"  "  "worthy  to  be  seen  ;"  but  in  poetry  and 
in  later  prose  it  meant  "one  who  may  be  seen,"  "visible." 

The   following  passages   illustrate   the   variable   nature    of   this 
ellipsis  : —  "I  have  been  a  debtor  to  you 

For  curtesies  which  I  will  be  ever  to  pay  you, 
And  yet  pay  still."—  Cymb.  i.  4.  39. 

i.e.  "kindnesses  which  I  intend  to  be  always  ready  to  pay  you,  and 
yet  to  go  on  paying." 

We  still  retain  an  ellipsis  of  "under  necessity"  in  the  phrase 

"  I  am  (yet)  to  learn."— M.  of  V.'\.  I.  5. 
But  we  should  not  say  : 

"  That  ancient  Painter  who  being  (under  necessity)  to  represent 
the  griefe  of  the  bystanders,"  &c. — MONTAIGNE,  3. 
We  should   rather  translate   literally   from    Montaigne  :    "  Ayant 
a  representer." 

In     "  I  am  to  break  with  thee  of  some  affairs," 

T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  I.  59. 

the  meaning  is  partly  of  desire  and  partly  of  necessity:  "I  want." 
So  Bottom  says  to  his  fellows  : 

"O,  masters,  I  am  (ready)  to  discourse  wonders." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  2.  29. 
The  ellipsis  is  "sufficient"  in 

"  Mark  Antony  is  every  hour  in  Rome 
Expected  ;  since  he  went  from  Egypt  'tis 
A  space  (sufficient)  for  further  travel."—/*,  and  C.  ii.  I.  31. 


IRREGULARITIES.  295 


IRREGULARITIES. 

406.  Double  Negative. — Many  irregularities  may  be  explained 
by  the  desire  of  emphasis  which  suggests  repetition,  even  where 
repetition,  as   in  the   case   of  a  negative,    neutralizes  the  original 
phrase  : 

"  First  he  denied  yon  had  in  him  no  right." 

C.  ofE.  iv.  2.  7. 

"  You  may  deny  that  you  were  not  the  cause." 

Rich.  III.  i.  3.  90. 

"  Forbade  the  boy  he  should  not  pass  these  bounds.'' — P.  P.  9. 

"No  sonne,   were  he*  never  so  old  of  yeares,   might   not 
marry." — ASCH.  37. 

This  idiom  is  a  very  natural  one,  and  quite  common  in  E.  E. 

Double  Comparative  and  Superlative,  See  Adjectives,  n. 

407.  Double  Preposition.     Where  the  verb  is  at  some  dis- 
tance from  the  preposition  with  which  it  is  connected,  the  preposi- 
tion is  frequently  repeated  for  the  sake  of  clearness. 

"And  generally  in  all  shapes  that  man  goes  up  and  down  in, 
from  fourscore  to  thirteen,  this  spirit  walks  in. " 

T.ofA.  ii.  2.  119. 

"  For  in  what  case  shall  wretched  I  be  in." — DANIEL. 
"But  on  us 'both  did  haggish  age  steal  on." — A.  IV.  i.  2.  29. 
"  The  scene  where/';*  we  play  /';/." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  139. 
"/«  what  enormity  is  Marcius  poor  in?" — Coriol.  ii.  I.  18. 
"  To  what  form  but  that  he  is,  should  wit  larded  with  malice,  and 
malice  forced  with  wit,  turn  him  to?" — Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  i.  63. 

408.  "Neither  . .  .  nor,"  used  like  "Both  . . .  and,"  fol- 
lowed by  "not." 

"  Not  the  king's  crown  nor  the  deputed  sword, 
The  marshal's  truncheon  nor  the  judge's  robe, 
Become  them,"  &c.—  M.  for  M.  ii.  2.  60. 

*  The  use  of  "never  so"  is  to  be  explained  (as  in  Greek,  Bav/jiaarov  oaov) 
by  an  ellipsis.    Thus — 

"Though  ne'er  so  richly  parted  (endowed)." — E.  out  &*c.  iii.  i. 
means — "  Though  he  were  endowed  richly — though  never  a  man  were  endowed 
so  richly." 


296  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

This  very  natural  irregularity  (natural,  since  the  tinbecomingness 
may  be  regarded  as  predicated  both  of  the  "king's  crown,"  the 
"deputed  sword,"  and  the  "marshal's  truncheon")  is  very 
common. 

"  He  nor  that  affable  familiar  ghost 

That  nightly  gulls  him  with  intelligence 

As  victors  of  my  silence  cannot  (406)  boast." — Sonn.  86. 

The  following  passage  may  perhaps  be  similarly  explained  : 

"  He*  waived  indifferently  ^tivixt  doing  them  neither  good  nor 

harm." — Coriol.  ii.  2.  17. 

But  it  is  perhaps  more  correct  to  say  that  there  is  here  a 
confusion  of  two  constructions,  "  He  waived  'twixt  good  and 
harm,  doing  them  neither  good  nor  harm."  The  same  con- 
fusion of  two  constructions  is  exemplified  below  in  the  use  of  the 
superlative. 

409.  Confusion  of  two  Constructions  in  Superlatives. 

"  This  is  the  greatest  error  of  all  the  rest.  "-M.  Ar.  D.  v.  i.  252. 
"  Of  all  other  affections  it  is  the  most  importune." — B.  E.  Envy. 
"  York  is  most  unmeet  of  any  man." — 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  167. 
"  Of  all  men  else  I  have  avoided  thee." — Macbeth,  v.  8.  4. 
"  He  hath  simply  the  best  wit  of  any  handicraft-man  in  Athens." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  2.  9. 
"To  try  whose  right, 

Of  thine  or  mine,*  is  most  in.  Helena." — Ib.  iii.  2.  337. 
"  I  do  not  like  the  tower  of  any  place." — Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  68. 
This  (which  is  a  thoroughly  Greek  idiom,  though  independent  in 
English)  is  illustrated  by  Milton's  famous  line — 

"  The  fairest  of  her  daughters  Eve." 

The  line  is  a  confusion  of  two  constructions,  "Eve  fairer  than 
all  her  daughters,"  and  "  Eve  fairest  of  all  women."  So  "  I  dislike 
the  tower  more  than  any  place,"  and  "most  of  all  places"  becomes 
"  of 'any  place." 

Our  modern  "  He  is  the  best  man  that  I  have  ever  seen,"  seems 
itself  to  be  incorrect,  if  "  that"  be  the  relative  to  "man."  It  may, 
perhaps,  be  an  abbreviation  of  "He  is  the  best  man  of  the  men 
that  I  have  ever  seen." 

*  Comp.  if  the  reading  be  retained — 

"Which,  of  he  or  Adrian,  begins  to  crow?" — Temp.  \.  i.  29. 


IRREGULARITIES.  297 

410.  Confusion  of  two  constructions  with  "whom." 

"Young  Ferdinand  whom  they  suppose  is  drown  d." 

Temp.  iii.  2.  92. 

"Of  Arthur  whom  they  say  is  killed  to-night."— A".  J.  iv.  2. 165. 

"  The  nobility  .  .  .  whom  we  see  have  sided." — Coriol.  iv.  2.  2. 
So  in  St.  Matt.   xvi.    13,   all  the   versions   except  Wickliffe's  have 
"  Whom  do  men  say  that  I,  the  son  of  man,  am?"     Wickliffe  has 
"  Whom  seien  men  to  be  mannes  sone?" 

The  last  passage  explains  the  idiom.  It  is  a  confusion  of  two 
constructions,  e.g.  "  Ferdinand  who,  they  suppose,  is  drowned" 
and  "whom  they  suppose  to  be  drowned." 

411.  Other  confusions  of  two  constructions. 

"Why  I  do  trifle  thus  with  his  despair 
Is  done  to  cure  it," — Lear,  iv.  6.  33. 

combines  "  Why  I  trifle  is  to  cure"  and  "My  trifling  is  done  to 
cure."  In  itself  it  is  illogical. 

"The  battle  done,  and  they  within  our  power 
Shall  never  see  his  pardon," — Lear,  v.  I.  67. 

is  a  confusion  of  "  let  the  battle  be  done,  and  they"  and  "the  battle 
(being)  done,  they." 

"  I  saw  not  better  sport  these  seven  years  day" — 2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  I.  3. 
A  combination  of  "since  this  day  seven  years"  and  " during  these 
seven  years." 

"  Out  of  all  'cess  (excess),"— I  Hen.  IV.  ii.  I.  6. 
is  a  confusion  of  "to  excess"  or   "in   excess"  and    "out   of  all 
bounds."     "  So  late   ago,"   T.  N.  \.   I.  22,  seems  a  combination 
of   "  so  lately  "  and  "  so  short  a  time  ago" 

"Marry  that,  I  think,  be  young  Petruchio," — R.  and  J.  i.  5.  133. 
is  a  confusion  of  "That,  I  think,  is"  and  "I  think  that  that  be" 
For  the  subjunctive  after  "  think,"  see  Subjunctive,  368  and  299. 

So,  perhaps, 

"This  youth,  howe'er  distressed,  appears  he  hath  had 

Good  ancestors," — Cymb.  iv.  2.  47. 

is  a  confusion  of  "  He  hath  had,  (it)  appears,  good  ancestors,"  and 
"He  appears  to  have  had."  This  is,  perhaps,  better  than  to  take 
"appears"  as  an  active  verb.  866295.  Precisely  similar  is  : 

•"  Let  what  is  meet  be  said,  it  must  be  meet." — Coriol.  iii.  I.  170. 


298  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

combining  "Let  what  is  meet  be  said  to  be"  and  "Let  it  be  said 
(that)  what  is  meet  must  be  meet." 

Compare  353,  and  add,  as  a  confusion  of  the  infinitive  and 
imperative, 

"There  is  no  more  but  (to)  say  so." — Rich.  HI.  iv.  2.  81. 
In     "We  would  have  had  you  heard"  Ib.  III.  iii.  5.  56,  there 
may  be  some  confusion  between  "  you  should  have  heard  "  and  "  we 
would  have  had  you  hear ; "  but  more  probably  the  full  construction 
is  "  We  would  have  had  you  (to  have)  heard  (360),"  and  "  to  have  "  is 
omitted  through  dislike  of  repetition.     So  Coriol.  iv.  6.  35  (415)  : 
"  We  should  .  .  .  found  \\.  so." 
Compare  also 

"He  would  have  had  me  (to  have)  gone  into  the  steeple-house. " 

Fox's  Journal '(ed.  1765),  p.  57. 
"  He  would  have  had  me  (to  have)  had  a  meeting. " — Ib.  p.  60. 

412.  Confusion  Of  proximity.  The  following  (though  a  not 
uncommon  Shakespearian  idiom)  would  be  called  an  unpardonable 
mistake  in  modern  authors  : — 

"  The  posture  of  your  blows  are  yet  unknown. " — J.  C.  v.  I.  33. 
"  Whose  loss  of  his  most  precious  queen  and  children 
Are  even  now  to  be  afresh  lamented." — W.  T.  iv.  I.  26. 

"  Which  now  the  loving  haste  of  these  fear  friends 
Somewhat  against  our  meaning  have  prevented. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  5.  56. 

"  The  venom  of  such  looks,  we  fairly  hope, 
Have  lost  their  quality.  "—Hen.   V.  v.  2.  19. 

"  But  yet  the  state  oi  things  require." — DANIEL,  Ulysses  and  Siren. 
"  The  approbation  of  those  .  .  .  are,"  &c. — Cymb.  i.  4.  17. 

"  How  the  sight 

Of  those  smooth  rising  cheeks  renew  the  story 
Of  young  Adonis." — B.  F.  F.  Sh.  i.  I. 
"Equality  of  two  domestic  powers 
Breed  scrupulous  faction." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  48. 

"The  voice  of  all  the  gods 
Make  heaven  drowsy." — L.  L.  L.  iv.  3.  345. 

Here,  however,  "voice"  may  be  (471)  for  "voices." 

"Then  know 
our  curses  light  on  thee."— K.  J.  iii.  i.  295. 


IRREGULARITIES.  299 

"  The  very  thought  of  my  revenges  that  way 
Recoil  upon  myself."— W!  T.  ii.  3.  20. 

"  More  than  the  scope 
Of  these  delated  articles  allow.'" — Hamlet,  \.  2.  38. 

The  subjunctive  is  not  required,  and  therefore  "  have  "  is  probably 
plural,  in 

"  If  the  scorn  of  your  bright  eyne 
Have  power  to  raise  such  love  in  mine." — A.  Y.  L.  iv.  3.  51. 

In  these  cases  the  proximity  of  a  plural  noun  seems  to  have  caused 
the  plural  verb,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  grammar.  The  two  nouns 
together  connected  by  "of"  seem  regarded  as  a  compound  noun 
with  plural  termination.  So 

"  These  kind-of -knaves."— Lear,  ii.  2.  107. 

"  T/wseUest-fair-of-faed-sfars."— B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  ii.  I. 

"  These  happy-^a/V  of  lovers  meet  straightway." — Ib, 
Similarly — 

"  Where  such  as  thou  mayest  find  him." — Macbeth,  iv.  2.  81. 
In  the  following  instance  the  plural  nominative  is  implied  from 
the  previous  singular  noun — 

"  As  every  alien  pen  hath  got  my  use, 
And  under  thee  their  poesy  disperse. " — Sonn.  78. 

In     "  And  the  stars  whose  feeble  light 

Give  a  pale  shadow  to  the  night," — B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iii.  1. 

perhaps  "give"  may  be  subjunctive  after  the  relative.     (See  367.) 

413.  Implied  nominative  from  participial  phrases.  Some- 
times a  nominative  has  to  be  extracted  ungrammatically  from  the 
meaning  of  a  sentence.    This  is  often  the  case  in  participial  phrases  : 

' '  Beaten  for  loyalty 
Excited  me  to  treason." — Cymb.  v.  5.  343. 

i.e.  "  my  having  been  beaten." 

"  The  king  of  his  own  virtuous  disposition, 
Aiming  belike  at  your  interior  hatred. 
Which  in  your  outward  actions  shews  itself, 
Makes  him  to  send."— Rich.  III.  i.  2.  63. 

i.e.  "  the  fact  that  the  king  aims  makes  him  to  send." 

414.  The   redundant  Object.     Instead  of  saying  "I    know 
what  you  are,"  in  which  the  object  of  the  verb  "I  know"  is  the 
clause  "what  you  are,"   Shakespeare  frequently  introduces  before 


3oo  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

the  dependent  clause  another  object,  so  as  to  make  'the  dependent 
clause  a  mere  explanation  of  the  object. 

"  I  know  you  what  you  are." — Lear,  i.  I.  272. 
"  I  see  you  what  you  are." — T.  N.  i.  4.  269. 
"  Conceal  me  what  I  am." — Ib.  i.  2.  53. 
"  You  hear  the  learn  d  Bellario  what  he  writes." 

M.  of  V.'vt.  i.  167. 

"  We'll  hear  him  what  he  says."— A.  and  C.  v.  I.  51. 
"  To  give  me  hearing  what  I  shall  reply." 

i  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  28. 
"  But  wilt  thou  hear  me  how  I  did  proceed  ?" 

Hamlet,  v.  2.  27. 
"March  on  and  mark  King  Richard  how  he  looks." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  61;  Ib.  v.  4.  1. 
"  Sorry  I  am  my  noble  cousin  should 
Suspect  me  that  I  mean  no  good  to  him. " 

Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  89. 
"  See  the  dew-drops,  how  they  kiss 
Every  little  flower  that  is."— B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  ii.  I. 

Hence  in  the  passive  : 

"  The  queen's  in  labour, 
(They  say  in  great  extremity)  and  fear'd 
She'll  with  the  labour  end,"— Hen.  VIII.  v.  I.  19. 

where  the  active  would  have  been  "  they  fear  the  queen  that  she  will 
die."     For  "fear"  thus  used,  see  Prepositions,  200. 

So  "no  one  asks  about  the  dead  man's  knell  for  whom  it  is" 
becomes  in  the  passive 

"  The  dead  man's  knell 

Is  there  scarce  asked,  for  who," — Macbeth,  iv.  3.  171. 
and  "about  which  it  is  a  wonder  how  his  grace  should  glean  it" 
becomes 

"  Which  is  a  wonder  how  his  grace  should  glean  it." 

Hen.   V.i.  i.  53. 

This  idiom  is  of  constant  occurrence  in  Greek  ;  but  it  is  very 
natural  after  a  verb  of  observation  to  put,  first  the  primary  object  of 
observation,  e.g.  "  King  Richard,"  and  then  the  secondary  object, 
viz.  "  King  Richard's  looks."  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  what- 
ever for  supposing  that  this  idiom  is  borrowed  from  the  Greek.  After 
a  verb  of  commanding  the  object  cannot  always  be  called  redundant, 


IRREGULARITIES.  301 

"(She)  Uade  me,  if  I  had  a  friend  that  loved  her, 
I  should  but  teach  him  how  to  tell  my  story." 

Othello,  i.  3.  1C5. 

i.e.  "  she  commanded  me  (that)  I  should,"  &c.   But  it  is  redundant  in 

"  The  constable  desires  thee  thou  wilt  mind 
Thy  followers  of  repentance."  —  Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  85. 

"  He  wills  you  .  .  .  that  you  divest  yourself."  —  Ib.  ii.  4.  77-8. 
Compare 

"  Belike  they  had  some  notice  of  (about)  the  people 
Mow  I  had  moved  them."  —  J.  C.  iii.  2.  275. 

A  somewhat  different  case  of  the  redundant  object  is  found  in 

"  Know  you  not,  master,  to  some  kind  of  men 
Their  graces  serve  them  but  as  enemies? 
No  more  do  yours,"  —  A.  Y.  L.  ii.  3.  10. 

where  the  last  line  means,  '  '  your  graces  are  not  more  serviceable 
to  you." 

415.  Construction  changed  by  change  of  thought. 

"One  of  the  prettiest  touches  was  when,  at  the  relation  of  the 
queen's  death,  .  .  .  how  attentiveness  wounded  his  daughter."  — 
W.  T.  v.  2.  94. 

The  narrator  first  intends  to  narrate  the  point  of  time,  then 
diverges  into  the  manner,  of  the  action. 

"  Purpose  is  but  the  slave  to  memory, 
Which  now,  like  fruit  unripe,  sticks  on  the  tree, 

unshaken  when  they  mellow  be."  —  Hamlet,  iii.  2.  201. 


The  subject,  which  is  singular,  is  here  confused  with,  and  lost  in, 
that  to  which  it  is  compared,  which  is  plural.  Perhaps  this  ex- 
planation also  suits  : 

"  And  then  our  arms,  like  to  a  muzzled  bear, 

Save  in  aspect  hath  all  offence  sealed  up,"  —  K.  J.\\.  I.  250. 
though  this  may  be  a  case  of  plural  nominative  with  singular  verb. 
(See  334.) 

In  the  following,  Henry  V.  begins  by  dictating  a  proclamation, 
but  under  the  influence  of  indignation  passes  into  the  imperative  of 
the  proclamation  itself  : 

"  Rather  proclaim  it,  Westmoreland,  through  our  host 
That  he  which  hath  no  stomach  to  this  fight 
/.(/him  depart."  —  Hen.   V.  iv.  3.  35-6. 


302  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

This  is  more  probable  than  that  "he  "  (224)  is  used  for  "  man." 
"  Should  "  is  treated  as  though  it  were  "  should  have  "  (owing  to 
the  introduction  of  the  conditional  sentence  with  "had")  in  the 
following  anomalous  passage  : 

"  We  should  by  this  to  all  our  lamentation, 
If  he  had  gone  forth  consul,  found  it  so." — Coriol.  iv.  6.  35. 

Sofiicfi.  III.  iii.  5.  56  (411). 

The  way  in  which  a  divergence  can  be  made  from  the  subject  to 
the  thing  compared  with  the  subject  is  illustrated  by 

"  So  the  proportions  of  defence  are  filled  : 
Which,  of  a  weak  and  niggardly  projection, 
Doth,  like  a  miser,  spoil  his  coat  with  scanting 
A  little  cloth."— Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  46. 

"  Whose  veins,  like  a  dull  river  far  from  spring 
Is  still  the  same,  slow,  heavy,  and  unfit 
For  stream  and  motion,  though  the  strong  winds  hit 
With  their  continual  power  upon  his  sides." 

B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  i.  I. 
"  But,  good  my  brother, 
Do  not,  as  some  ungracious  pastors  do, 
Show  me  the  steep  and  thorny  way  to  heaven, 
Whiles,  like  a  puffed  and  reckless  libertine, 
Himself  the  primrose  path  of  dalliance  treads." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  50. 
instead  of  "  whiles  you  tread."     But  in 

"Those  sleeping  stones 
That,  as  a  waist,  doth  girdle  you  about, 
Had  been  dishabited,"—  K.  J.  ii.  I.  216. 

"doth,"  probably,  has  "that"  for  its  subject.     See  Relative,  247. 

In  "  Are  not  you  he 

That  frights  the  maidens  of  the  villagery, 
Skim  milk,  and  sometimes  labour  in  the  quern 
And  bootless  make  the  breathless  housewife  churn?" 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  35-9. 

the  transition  is  natural  from  "Are  not  you  the  person  who?"  to 
"  Do  not  you?" 

416.  Construction  changed  for  clearness.    (See  also  285.) 

Just  as  (285)  that  is  sometimes  omitted  and  then  inserted  to  connect 
a  distant  clause  with  a  first  part  of  a  sentence,  so  sometimes  "to  " 
is  inserted  apparently  for  the  same  reason — 


IRREGULARITIES.  303 

"  That  God  forbid,  that  made  me  first  your  slave, 
I  should  in  thought  control  your  times  of  pleasure, 
Or  at  your  hand  the  account  of  hours  to  crave." — Sonn.  58. 

Here  "to"  might  be  omitted,  or  "should"  might  be  inserted 
instead,  but  the  omission  would  create  ambiguity,  and  the  insertion 
would  be  a  tedious  repetition. 

"  Heaven  would  that  she  these  gifts  shoztld  have, 
And  I  to  live  and  die  her  slave." — A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  162. 

"  Keep  your  word,  Phoebe,  that  you'//  marry  me, 
Or  else,  refusing  me,  to  wed  this  shepherd. " 

Ib.  v.  4.  21-2. 

"  But  on  this  condition,  that  she  should  follow  him,  and  he  not 
to  follow  her.  "—BACON,  Adv.  of  L.  284. 

"  The  punishment  was,  that  they  should  be  put  out  of  commons 
and  not  to  be  admitted  to  the  table  of  the  gods. " — Ib.  260. 

"  That  we  make  a  stand  upon  the  ancient  way,  and  look  about 
us  and  discover  what  is  the  straight  and  right  way,  and  so 
to  walk  in  it." — B.  E.  IOO. 

In  the  following,  the  infinitive  is  used  in  both  clauses,  but  the  "/0" 
only  in  the  latter  : — 

"  In  a  word,  a  man  were  better  relate  himself  to  a  Statue  or 
Picture,  than  to  suffer  his  thoughts  to  pass  in  smother." 

B.  E.  103. 


417.  Noun  Absolute.    See  also  Redundant  Pronoun,  243. 

Sometimes  a  noun  occurs  in  a  prominent  position  at  the  beginning 
of  a  sentence,  to  express  the  subject  of  the  thought,  without  the 
usual  grammatical  connection  with  a  verb  or  preposition.  In  some 
cases  it  might  almost  be  called  a  vocative,  only  that  the  third  person 
instead  of  the  second  is  used,  and  then  the  pronoun  is  not  redundant. 
Sometimes  the  noun  seems  the  real  subject  or  object  of  the  verb, 
and  the  pronoun  seems  redundant.  When  the  noun  is  the  object,  it 
is  probably  governed  by  some  preposition  understood,  "as  for," 
"as  to." 

"My  life's  foul  deed,  my  life's  fair  end  shall  free  it." — R.  ofL. 

"  The  prince  that  feeds  great  natures,  they  will  slay  him." 

13.  J.  Sejanus,  iii.  3. 

"  But  virtue,  as  it  never  will  be  moved, 
So  lust,"  &.c.—I/amlct,  \.  5.  53. 


3o4  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

41  Look  when  I  vow,  I  weep  ;  and  vows  so  born, 

In  their  nativity  all  truth  appears." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  124. 
Hut  this  may  be  explained  by  376. 

"Tis  certain,  every  man  that  dies  ill,  the  ill  upon  his  own  head." 
— Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  197. 

"  But  if  I  thrive,  the  gain  of  my  attempt 
The  least  of  you  shall  share  his  part  thereof." 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  267. 

"  That  thing  you  speak  of  I  took  it  for  a  man." — Lear,  iv.  6.  77. 
The  following  may  be  thus  explained  : — 

"Rather  proclaim  it,  Westmoreland,  through  our  host, 
That  he  which  hath  no  stomach  to  this  fight, 
Let  him  depart."— Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  34. 
"That  can  we  not  .  .  .  but  he  that  proves  the  king 
To  him  will  we  prove  loyal."—  K.  J.  ii.  i.  271. 
"  He"  being  regarded  as  the  normal  form  of  the  pronoun,  is  appro- 
priate for  this  independent  position.     So 

"But  I  shall  laugh  at  this  a  twelve-month  hence, 
That  they  who  brought  me  in  my  master's  hate 
I  live  to  look  upon  their  tragedy." — Rich.  III.  iii.  2.  57. 

These  three  examples  might,  however,  come  under  the  head  of 
Construction  Changed,  415,  as  the  following  (which  closely 
resembles  the  first)  certainly  does  : 

"  My  lord  the  emperor, 

Sends  thee  this  word  that,  if  thou  love  thy  son, 
I^et  Marcius.  Lucius,  or  thyself,  old  Titus, 
Or  any  one  of  you,  chop  off  your  hand." — T.  A.  iii.  I.  151 

In  this,   and  perhaps  in  the  first  example,  the  "that,"  like  art  in 
Greek,  is  equivalent  to  inverted  commas. 

"May  it  please  your  grace,  Antipholus,  my  husband, 
Whom  I  made  lord  of  me,  .  .  .  this  ill  day 
A  most  outrageous  fit  of  madness  took  him." 

C.  of  E.  v.  i.  138. 
"  The  trumpery  in  my  house,  go  bring  it  hither." — Temp.  iv.  I.  186. 

It  is,  of  course,  possible  to  have  an  infinitive  instead  of  a  noun  : 
"  To  strike  him  dead,  I  hold  it  not  a  sin." — R.  and  J.  i.  4.  61. 
For  the  noun  absolute  with  the  participle,  see  Participle,  376. 

418.  Foreign  Idioms.  Several  constructions  in  Bacon,  Ascham, 
and  Ben  Jonson,  such  as  "ill,"  for  "ill  men"  (Latin  'mali'), 
' '  without  all  question  "  ( '  sine  omni  dubitatione  '),  seem  to  have  been 


IRREGULARITIES.  305 

borrowed  from  Latin.  It  is  questionable,  however,  whether  there 
are  many  Latinisms  in  construction  (Latinisms  in  the  formation  of 
words  are  of  constant  occurrence)  in  Shakespeare.  \Ve  may 
perhaps  quote — 

"  Those  dispositions  that  of  late  transform  you 
From  what  you  rightly  are." — Lear,  i.  4.  242. 

Compare 

"He  is  ready  to  cry  all  this  day," — B.  J.  Sil.  Worn.  4. 
as  an  imitation  of  the  Latin  use  of  "jampridem"  with  the  present 
in  the  sense  of  the  perfect.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  same 
thought  of  continuance  may  have  prompted  the  use  of  the  present, 
both  in  English  and  Latin.  "  He  is  and  has  been  ready  to  cry,"&c. 
The  use  of  "  more  better,"  &c.,  the  double  negative,  and  the  infinitive 
after  '  than,"  are  certainly  of  English  origin.  The  following — 

"  Whispering  fame 

Knowledge  and  proof  doth  to  the  jealous  give, 
Who  than  to  fail  would  their  own  thought  believe,"  — 

B.  J.  Sejan.  2. 

in  the  omission  of  "rather"  after  "would,"  reminds  us  of  the  omis- 
sion of  "potius  "  after  "malo."  Perhaps  also 

"  Let  that  be  mine," — M.  for  M.  \\.  2.  12. 
is  an  imitation  of  "meum  est,"  "It  is  my  business." 

The  following  resembles  the  Latin  idiom,  "post  urbem  conditam," 
except  that  there  is  also  an  ellipsis  of  a  pronoun  : 

"  'Tis  our  hope,  sir, 

After  (our  being)  well  entered  (as)  soldiers,  to  return 
And  find  your  grace  in  health." — A.  W.  ii.  I.  6. 

I  cannot  recall  another  such  an  instance,  and  it  is  doubtful  whe- 
ther "after"  does  not  here  mean  "hereafter:"  "It  is  our  hope 
to  return  hereafter  well-apprenticed  soldiers"  But  such  participial 
phrases  preceded  by  prepositions  seem  to  be  of  classical  origin,  as 
in  Milton  : 

"  Nor  delay'd 
The  winged  saint  after  his  charge  received." 

MILTON,  P.  L.  v.  248. 

•'  He,  after  Eve  seduced,  unmindecl  slunk 
Into  the  wood  fast  by." — Ib.  332. 

and  even,  contrary  to  the  particular  Latin  idiom  : 

"  They  set  him  freeJMtetanfAu  ransom  pc.id" — 1  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3. 72. 
X 


3o6  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

The  following  resembles  the  Latin  use  of  "qui  si,"  for  the  English 
"and  if  he." 

"  Which  parti-coated  presence  of  loose  love 
Put  on  by  us,  if  in  your  heavenly  eyes 
Have  misbecomed  our  oaths  and  gravities."— L.  L.  L.  v.  2. 778. 

419.  Transposition  of  Adjectives. 

The  adjective  is  placed  after  the  noun  : 

(1)  In  legal  expressions  in  which  French  influence  can  be  traced  : 

"  Heir  apparent."— \  Hen.  IV.  i.  2.  65. 

"  Heir  general."— Hen.  V.  i.  2.  66. 

"Thou  cam'st  not  of  the  blood-royal." — Ib.  157. 

"In  the  seat  royal"— Rich.  III.  iii.  i.  164. 

"Sport  royal."—  T.  N.  ii.  3.  187. 

"  Or  whether  that  the  body  public  be  a  horse." 

M.forM.  i.  2.  163. 
"  My  letters  patents  (Fol. )  give  me  leave."— Rich.  II.  ii.  3. 130. 

(2)  Where  a  relative  clause,  or   some   conjunctional   clause,   is 
understood  between  the  noun  and  adjective  : 

"Duncan's  horses, 

(Though)  Beauteous  and  swift,  the  minions  of  their  race, 
Turned  wild  in  nature."— Macbeth,  ii.  4.  15. 
"Filling  the  whole  realm  .  .  .  with  new  opinions 

(That  are)  Divers  and  dangerous ." — Hen.  VIII.  v.  3.  18. 
Hence,  where  the  noun  is  unemphatic,  as  "thing,"  "creature," 
this  transposition  may  be  expected  : 

"In  killing  creatures  (that  were)  vile." — Cyntb.  v.  5.  252. 
"  He  look'd  upon  things  (that  are)  precious  as  they  were 
The  common  muck  of  the  world." — Coriol.  ii.  2.  129. 
Hence,  after  the  name  of  a  class,  the  adjective  is  more  likely  to  be 
transposed  than  in  the  case  of  a  proper  name.     Thus 

"  Celestial  Dian,  goddess  argentine."— P.  of  T.  v.  2.  251. 
i.e.  "goddess (that  bearest)  the  silver  bow."   The  difference  between 
a  mere  epithet  before  the  noun,  and  an  additional  statement  conveyed 
1  >y  an  adjective  after  the  noun,  is  illustrated  by 

"If  yet  your  gentle  souls  fly  in  the  air 
And  be  not  fix'd  in  (a)  doom  (that  \s)  perpetual" 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  11,  12. 
Sioiilarly  in 

"  With  eyes  severe,  and  beard  of  formal  cut." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7. 155. 


TRANSPOSITIONS.  3°7 

"My  presence  like  a  ™\&  pontifical"— \  lien.  IV.  iii.  2.  56. 
"eyes"  and  "a  robe"  are  unemphatic,  their  existence  being  taken 
for  granted,  and  the  essence  of  the  expression  is  in  the  transposed 
adjective. 

The  "three"  is  emphatic,  and  the  divorcing  of  some  "souls  and 
bodies  "  is  taken  as  a  matter  of  course,  in 

"  Souls  and  bodies  hath  he  divorced  three."— T.  N.  iii.  4.  260 
Somewhat  similar — 

"  Satisfaction  there  can  be  none."—Ib.  262. 

This  relative  force  is  well  illustrated  by 

' '  Prince.   I  fear  no  uncles  dead. 

(t'lcit.  Nor  none  that  live.  I  hope." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  14«5. 

(3)  Hence   participles   (since    they   imply   a  relative),    and   any 
adjectives   that   from   their  terminations   resemble   participles,   are 
peculiarly  liable  to  be  thus  transposed. 

Similarly  adjectives  that  end  in  -6k,  -iff,  and  -/,  -ive,  -al,  are  often 
found  after  their  nouns,  e.g.  "unspeakable,"  " unscaleable,"  "im- 
pregnable;" "absolute,"  "devout,"  "remote,"  "infinite"  (often), 
"  past,"  "  inveterate  ;"  "compulsative,"  "  invasive,"  "  defective  ;" 
"capital,"  "tyrannical,"  "virginal,"  "angelical,"  "unnatural." 

(4)  Though  it  may  be  generally  said  that  when  the  noun  is  un- 
emphatic,  and  the  adjective  is  not  a  mere  epithet  but  essential  to 
the  sense,  the  transposition  may  be  expected,  yet  it  is  probable  that 
the  influence  of  the  French  idiom  made  this  transposition  especially 
common  in  the  case  of  some  words  derived  from  French,     Hence, 
perhaps,  the  transposition  in 

"  Of  antres  vast  and  deserts  idle."— Othello,  i.  I.  140. 
And,  besides  "apparent"  in  the  legal  sense  above,  we  have 

"As  well  the  fear  of  harm  as  harm  apparent." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  130. 

Hence,  perhaps,  the  frequent  transposition  of  "divine,"   as 
"By  Providence  divine." — Tempest,  i.  2.  158. 

So        "  Ful  wel  sche  sang  the  service  dezyne." 

CHAUCER,  C.  T.  122. 
"Men  dcroutr—Hen.  V.  i.  i.  9. 

"  Unto  the  appetite  and  affection  common.'1'' — Coriol.  i.  I.  108 

X   2     , 


308  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Latin  usage  may  account  for  some  expressions,  as 

"  A  sectary  astronomical" — Lear,  i.  2.  164. 

419  a.  Transposition  of  adjectival  phrases. 

It  has  been  shown  above  (419),  that  when  an  adjective  is  not  a 
mere  epithet,  but  expresses  something  essential,  and  implies  a  rela- 
tive, it  is  often  placed  after  the  noun.  When,  however,  connected 
with  the  adjective,  e.g.  "whiter,"  there  is  some  adverbial  phrase, 
e.g.  "than  snow,"  it  was  felt  that  to  place  the  adjective  after  the 
noun  might  sometimes  destroy  the  connection  between  the  noun  and 
adjective,  since  the  adjective  was,  as  it  were,  drawn  forward  to  the 
modifying  adverb.  Hence  the  Elizabethans  sometimes  preferred  to 
place  the  adjectival  part  of  the  adjective  before,  and  the  adverbial 
part  after,  the  noun.  The  noun  generally  being  unemphatic  caused 
but  slight  separation  between  the  two  parts  of  the  adjectival 
phrase.  Thus  "whiter  than  snow,"  being  an  adjectival  phrase, 
"  whiter"  is  inserted  before,  and  "than  snow"  after,  the  noun. 

"  Nor  scar  that  [whiter]  skin-of-hers  [than  snow]." 

Othello,  v.  2.  4. 

"So  much  I  hate  a  [breaking]  cause  to  be 
[Of  heavenly  oaths]."— L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  355. 

So        "A  [promising]  face  [of  manly  princely  virtues]." 

B.  and  F.  (Walker). 
"  As  common 
As  any  [the  most  vulgar]  thing  [to  sense]." — Ham.  i.  2.  99. 

i.e.  "anything  the  most  commonly  perceived." 

"  I  shall  unfold  [equal]  discourtesy 
[To  your  best  kindness]." — Cymb.  ii.  3.  101. 
"The  [farthest]  earth  [removed  from  thee]."- — Sonn.  44. 
"Bid  these  [unknown]  friends  [to  us],  welcome." 

W.  T.  iv.  3.  65. 
"  Thou  [bloodier]  villain  [than  terms  can  give  thee  out]." 

Macbeth,  v.  8.  7. 
"  A  [happy]  gentleman  [in  blood  and  lineaments]." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  I.  9. 
"  As  a  [long-parted]  mother  [with  her  child]." 

//>.  iii.  2.  8.     (See  194.) 

'Thou  [little  better]  thing  [than  earth]."— Ib.  iii.  4.  77. 
'  You  have  won  a  [happy]  victory  [to  Rome]." 

Coriol.  v.  3.  18G. 


TRANSPOSITIONS. 


309 


Hence,  even  where  the  adjective  cannot  immediately  precede  the 
noun,  yet  the  adjective  comes  first,  and  the  adverb  afterwards. 
"That  were  to  enlard  \i\s>  fat-already -pride." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  205. 

"May  soon  return  to  this  our  [suffering]  country 
[Under  a  hand  accurst]." — Macbeth,  iii.  6.  48. 

"The  [appertaining]  rage 
[To  such  a  greeting]." — R.  and  J.  iii.  i.  66. 
"With  [declining]  head  [into  his  bosom]." — T.of Sh.  Ind.  I.  119. 
So  probably 

"Bear  our  [hack'd]  targets  [like  the  men  that  owe  them]." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  8.  31. 
This  is  very  common  in  other  Elizabethan  authors  : 

"The [stricken] hind  [with Shaft]."— LORD SURREY( Walker). 
"And  [worthie]  work  [of  infinite  reward]." 

SPENSER,  F.  Q.  iii.  2.  21. 
"Of  that  [too  wicked]  woman  [yet  to  die]." 

B.  and  F.  (Walker). 
"Some  sad  [malignant]  angel  [to  mine  honour]." — Ib. 

which  perhaps  explains 

"Bring  forth  that  [fatal]  screech-owl  [to  our  house]." 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  6.  56. 

So        "  Thou  [barren]  thing  [of  honesty]  and  honour  ! " — B.  and  F. 
perhaps  explains 

"Thou  perjur'd  and  thou  [simular]  man  [of  virtue]." 

Lear,  iii.  2.  54. 
"  Bring  me  a  [constant]  woman  [to  her  husband]." 

Hen.  VIII.  iii.  i.  134. 
"  O,  for  my  sake  do  you  with  fortune  chide, 

The  [guilty]  goddess  [of  my  harmful  deeds]."— Sonn.  in. 
11  To  this  [unworthy]  husband  [of  his  wife]." — A.  W.  iii.  4.  30. 
"  A  [dedicated]  beggar  [to  the  air]." — T.  of  A.  iv.  2.  13. 
This  transposition  extends  to  an  adverb  in 


"  And  thou  shalt  live  [as  freely]  as  thy  lord 
[To  call  his  fortunes  thine]." — T.  N.  i. 


4.  39,  40. 
i.e.  "  as  free  to  use  my  fortune  as  I  am." 

Unless  "  to  "  is  used  loosely  like  "  for,"  the  following  is  a  case  of 
transposition  : 

"  This  is  a  [dear]  manakin  [to  you],  Sir  Toby." 

T.  N.  iii.  2.  57. 


3io  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

420.  Transposition  of  Adverbs.  The  Elizabethan  authors 
allowed  themselves  great  licence  in  this  respect. 

We  place  adverbial  expressions  that  measure  excess  or  defect 
before  the  adjective  which  they  modify,  "twenty  times  better,"  &c. 
This  is  not  always  the  case  in  Shakespeare  : 

"  Being  tiventy  times  of  better  fortune." — A.  and  C.  iv.  I.  3. 
"  Our  spoils  (that)  we  have  brought  home 
Do  more  than  counterpoise,  a  full  third  part, 
The  charges  of  the  action." — Coriol.  v.  6.  77. 

"  I  am  solicited  not  by  a  few, 
And  those  of  true  condition." — Hen.  VIII,  i.  2.  18. 

For  not  transposed,  see  also  30$. 

"Like  to  a  harvest  man  that's  task'd  to  mow 
Or  all,  or  lose  his  hire." — Coriol.  i.  3.  40. 

In  "All  good  things  vanish  less  than  in  a  day"  (Nash),  there  is, 
perhaps,  a  confusion  between  "less  long-lived  than  a  day"  and 
"more  quickly  than  in  a  day."  At  all  events  the  emphatic  use  of 
"  less"  accounts  for  the  transposition. 

Such  transpositions  are  most  natural  and  frequent  in  the  case  of 
adverbs  of  limitation,  as  but  (see  But,  54)>  only,  even,  &c. 

"  Only  I  say," — Macbeth,  iii.  6.  2. 
for  "I  only  say." 

"  Only  I  yield  to  die."— J.  C.  v.  4.  12. 
for  "  I  yield  only  in  order  to  die," 

"  And  I  assure  you 

.Even  that  your  pity  is  enough  to  cure  me," — B.  J. 
for  "that  ei>en  your  pity." 

"lie  did  it  to  please  his  mother  and  to  be  partly  proud," 

Coriol.  i.  i.  40. 
for  "and partly  to  be  proud." 

Somewhat  similar  is 

"  Your  single  bond,  "-M.  of  V.  i.  3.  146. 
for  "  the  bond  of  you  alone." 

421.  Transposition  of  Adverbs.  When  an  adverb  is  trans- 
posed to  the  beginning  for  emphasis,  it  generally  transposes  the 
subject  after  the  verb,  but  adverbs  are  sometimes  put  at  the  be- 
ginning of  a  sentence  without  influencing  the  order  of  the  other 
words. 


TRA  NSFOSITIONS.  3  1 1 

"  Seldom  he  smiles."— J.  C.  i.  2.  205. 

"  For  always  I  am  Ccesar."— Ib.  i.  2.  212. 

"  No  more  that  thane  of  Cawclor  shall  deceive." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  63. 

"  Of  something  nearly  that  concerns  yourselves." 

J7.  N.  £>.i.  I.  lltt. 

422.  Transposition  Of  Article.  In  Early  English  we  some- 
times find  "a  so  new  robe."  The  Elizabethan  authors,  like  our- 
selves, transposed  the  a  and  placed  it  after  the  adjective  :  "  so 
new  a  robe."  But  when  a  participle  is  added  as  an  epithet  of  the 
noun,  e.g.  "fashioned,"  and  the  participle  itself  is  qualified  by  an 
adjective  used  as  an  adverb,  e.g.  "new,"  we  treat  the  whole  as 
one  adjective,  thus,  "so  new-fashioned  a  robe."  Shakespeare  on 
the  contrary  writes — 

"So  new  a  fashion 'd  robe." — K.  J.  iv.  2.  27. 
"  So  fair  an  offer'd  chain." — C.  of  R.  iii.  2.  186. 
"  Or  having  sworn  too  hard  a  keeping  bath." 

L.  L.  L.  i.  i.  65. 
"  So  rare  a  wonder'd  father  and  a  wife." 

Temp.  iv.  I.  123. 
"I  would  have  been  much  more  a  fresher  man." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  6.  20. 

We  still  say,  "too  great  a  wit,"  but  not  with  Chaucer,  C.  T.  : 

"  For  when  a  man  hath  overgret  a  wit," 

possibly  because  we  regard  "overgreat"  as  an  adjective,  and  "too 
great"  as  a  quasi-adverb.     Somewhat  similar  is  : 

"  On  once-a-flock-bed,  but  repair'd  with  straw, 
With  tape-ty'd  curtains  never  meant  to  draw." 

POPE,  Moral  E.  iii.  301. 

So  we  can  say  "how  poor  an  instrument,"  regarding  "how"  as 
an  adverb,  and  "how  poor"  as  an  adverbialized  expression,  but  not 

"What  poor  an  instrument," — A.  and  C.  v.  2.  236. 
because  "  what"  has  almost  lost  with  us  its  adverbial  force. 

"  So  brave(ly)  a  mingled  temper  saw  I  never." 

B.  and  F.  (Walker). 

"  Chaucer,  who  was  so  great(ly)  a  learned  scholar." 

KIN  ASTON  (Walker). 


312  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

The  a  is  used  even  after  the  comparative  adjective  in 
"If  you  should  need  a  pin, 
You  could  not  with  more  tame  a  tongue  desire  it." 

M.forM.  ii.  2.  46. 

423.  Transpositions  in   Noun- clauses  containing  two 

nouns  Connected  by  "of."  It  has  been  observed  in  412  that 
two  nouns  connected  by  "  of"  are  often  regarded  as  one.  Hence 
sometimes  pronominal  and  other  adjectives  are  placed  before  the 
whole  compound  noun  instead  of,  as  they  strictly  should  be,  before 
the  second  of  the  two  nouns. 

"  Yet  that  thy  brazen  gates  of  heaven  may  ope." 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  3.  40. 
"  My  pith  of  business."— M.  for  M.  i.  4.  70. 

"The  tribunes  have  pronounced 

My  everlasting  doom  of  banishment." — T.  A.  iii.  I.  51. 
"  Let  it  stamp  wrinkles  in  her  brow  of  youth." 

Lear,  i.  4.  806. 

"  My  latter  part  of  life.  "—A.  and  C.  iv.  6.  39. 
"  My  whole  course  of  life." — Othello,  i.  3.  91. 
"  I  will  presently  go  learn  their  day  of  marriage." 

M.  Ado,  ii.  2.  57. 

"  Thy  bruising  irons  of  wrath." — Rich.  III.  \.  3.  110. 
"  Thy  ministers  of  chastisement." — Ib.  113. 
"  In  my  prime  of  youth." — Ib.  119. 
"  Thy  heat  of  lust." — R.  of  L.  1473. 
"My  home  of  love." — Sonn.  109. 
"  And  punish  them  to  your  height  of  pleasure." 

M.forM.  \.  I.  240. 
"  His  means  of  death,  his  obscure  funeral." 

Hamlet,  iv.  5.  213. 
i.e.    "  the  means  of  his  death." 

"What  \syour  cause  of  distemper?"— Hamlet,  iii.  2.  350. 
"  You  r  sovereignty  of  reason."— Ib.  i.  4.  73.     (See  200.) 
"  My  better  part  of  man." — Macbeth,  v.  7.  18. 
11  His  chains  of  bondage." — Rich.  IL  i.  3.  89. 
"  Your  state  of  fortune  and  your  due  of  birth." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  127. 
This  is  perhaps  illustrated  by 

"  What  country-man  ?"—  T.  N.  v.  i.  238;   T.'ofSh.  i.  2.  190. 
for  <%a  man  of  what  country?" 


TRANSPOSITIONS.  313 

The  possessive  adjective  is  twice  repeated  in 

" Her  attendants  of  her  chamber." — A.  Y.  L.  ii.  2.  5. 
So    "  This  cause  of  Rome" — T.  A.  i.  I.  32. 

does   not   mean    "t/tis    cause    as  distinguished   from   other  causes 
of  Rome,"  but  "  this,  the  Roman  cause."     Somewhat  similar  is 

"  Your  reproof 
Were  well  deserv'd  of  rashness" — A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  124. 

where  we  should  say  "the  reproof  of  your  rashness"  (unless  "of" 
here  means  "about,"  "for"). 

"The  idea  of  her  life  shall  sweetly  creep 
Into  his  study  of  imagination." — M.  Ado,  iv.  2.  27. 

i.e.  "the  study  of  his  imagination." 

"  Our  raiment  and  state  of  bodies." — Coriol.  v.  3.  95. 
"More  than  ten  criers,  and  six  noise  of  trumpets." 

B.  J.  Sejan.  v.  7. 

The  compound  nature  of  these  phrases  explains,  perhaps,  the 
omission  of  the  article  in 

"  Hath  now  himself  met  with  the  fall-of-leaf." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  49. 

424.  Transposition  of  Prepositions  in  Relative  and  other 

Clauses.     We  now  dislike  using  such  transpositions  as 

"The  late  demand  that  you  did  sound  me  in  "--Rich.  III.  iv.  2. 87. 
"  Betwixt  that  smile  we  would  aspire  to." — Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  368. 
"A  thousand  men  that  fishes  gnawed  upon." — Rich.  III.  i.  4.  25. 
"  Found  thee  a  way  out  of  his  wreck  to  rise  /;;." 

lien.  VIII.  iii.  2.  438. 

But  it  may  be  traced  to  E.  E.  (203),  and  is  very  common  in 
Shakespeare,  particularly  in  Hen.  VIII. ,  where  we  even  find 

"Where  no  mention 
Of  me  must  more  be  heard  of" — Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  435. 

It  has  been  said  above  (203)  that  the  dissyllabic  forms  of  prepo- 
sitions are  peculiarly  liable  to  these  transpositions.  Add  to  the 
above  examples : 

"  Like  a  falcon  towering  in  the  skies, 
Coucheth  the  fowl  below." — R.  of  L.  506. 

425.  Transposition  after  Emphatic  Words.    The  influence 

of  an  emphatic  word  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence  is  shown  in  the 


3H  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

transposition  of  the  verb  and  subject.     In  such  cases  the  last  as  well 
as  the  first  word  is  often  emphatic. 

"  In  dreadful  secrecy  impart  they  did" — Hamlet,  i.  2.  207. 

"  And  so  have  I  a  noble  father  tost, 
A  sister  driven  into  desperate  terms. " — Ib,  iv.  7.  25. 

Here  note,  that  though  the  first  line  could  be  re-transposed  and 
Laertes  could  naturally  say  "I  have  lost  a  father,"  on  the  other  hand 
he  could  not  say  "I  have  driven  a  sister"  without  completely 
changing  the  sense.  "  Have  "  is  here  used  in  its  original  sense,  and 
is  equivalent  to  "I  find."  When  "have"  is  thus  used  without  any 
notion  of  action,  it  is  separated  from  the  participle  passive. 

"  But  answer  made  it  none." — Plamlet,  i.  2.  216. 
"  Pray  can  I  not"—Ib.  iii.  3.  38. 

11  Supportable 
To  make  the  dear  loss  have  I  means  much  weaker" 

Temp.  v.  i.  146. 

The  influence  of  an  emphatic  adverbial  expression  preceding  is 
shown  in  the  difference  between  the  order  in  the  second  and  the  first 
of  the  two  following  lines  : — 

"  As  every  alien  pen  hath  got  my  use, 
And  under  thee  their  poetry  disperse." — Sonn.  78. 

"  I  did,  my  lord, 
But  loath  am  to  produce  so  bad  an  instrument." 

A.  W.  v.  3.  201. 

"Before  the  time  I  did  Lysander  see, 
Seen? d  Athens  as  a  paradise  to  me." — M.  N.  D.\.  I.  205. 

When  the  adverbs  "never,"  "ever,"  are  emphatic  and  placed 
near  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  the  subject  often  follows  the  verb, 
almost  always  when  the  verb  is  "was,"  &c.  We  generally  write 
now  "never  was,"  but  Shakespeare  often  wrote  "  (there)  was 
never." 

"  Was  never  "widow  had  so  dear  a  loss." — Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  77. 
Sometimes  a  word  is  made  emphatic  by  repetition  : 
"  Sec.  0.       Peace  !  We'll  hear  him. 

Third  0.  Ay,  by  my  beard  will  we."—T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  I.  10. 

"  Ha  in  let.   Look  you,  these  are  the  stops. 

Guild.      But  these  cannot  I  command." — Hamlet,  iii.  3.  377. 

Or  partly  by  antithesis,  as  well  as  by  its  natural  importance  : 


TRANSPOSITIONS.  315 

"  I  your  commission  will  forthwith  despatch, 
And  he  to  England  shall  along  with  you." 

llamlct,  iii.  3.  3,  4. 

"  My  soul  shall  thine  keep  company  to  heaven." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  6.  1(5. 

The  following  is  explained  by  the  omission  of  "there  :" 

"  I  am  question'd  by  my  fears  .  .  .  that  (there)  may  blow 
No  sneaping  winds  at  home. " — W.  T.  i.  2.  13. 

There  seems  a  disposition  to  place  participles,  as   though  used 
absolutely,  before  the  words  which  they  qualify. 

"And  these  news, 

Having  been  we!!,  that  would  have  made  me  sick, 
Being  sick,  have  in  some  measure  made  me  well." 

2  lien.  IV,  i.  I.  138. 
It  is  rare  to  find  such  transpositions  as 

"  Then  the  rich  jewell'd  coffer  of  Darius, 

Transported  shall  be  at  high  festivals." — I  Hen.  VI.  i.  6.  26. 

Transpositions  are  common  in  prose,  especially  when  an  adverb 
precedes  the  sentence. 

"  Yet  hath  Leonora,  my  onely  daughter,  escaped." 

MONTAIGNE  (Florio),  225. 

"  And,  therefore,  should  not  -we  marry  so  young." — Ib.    • 
"  Now,  sir,  the  sound  that  tells  what  hour  it  is 
Are  clamorous  groans," — Rich.  II.  v.  5.  56. 

is  rather  a  case  of  "  confusion  of  proximity  "  ("  are"  being  changed 
to  "  is  ")  than  transposition.  (See  302.) 

426.  Transposition   after  Relative.    The  relative  subject, 

possibly  as  being  somewhat  unemphatic  itself,  brings  forward  the 
object  into  a  prominent  and  emphatic  position,  and  consequently 
throws  a  part  of  the  verb  to  the  end,  not  however  (as  in  German) 
the  auxiliary. 

"  By  Richard  that  dead  is." — I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  146. 

"  But  chide  rough  winter  that  the  flower  hath  killed." — R.  of  L. 

"  T/iat  hcarcns  light  <//<////</*."— SPENS.  F.  Q.  i.  I.  7. 

427.  Other  Transpositions.     In  the  second  of  two  passive 
clauses  when  the  verb  "is"  is  omitted,   the  subject  is  sometimes 
transposed,  perhaps  for  variety. 


316  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

11  When  liver,  heart,  and  brain, 
These  sovereign  thrones,  are  all  supplied,  and  filled 
(Are)  Her  sweet  perfections  with  one  self  king." 

T.  N.  i.  i.  39. 

"  Since  his  addiction  was  to  courses  vain, 
And  never  (was)  noted  in  him  any  study." — Hen.  V.  i.  1.57. 

It  is  not  probable  that  "perfections"  and  "study"  are  here  ab- 
solutely used  with  the  participle.     See,  however,  And,  95- 

In  "By  such  two  that  would  by  all  likelihood  have  confounded 
each  other"  (Cymb.  i.  4.  53),    "two"  is  emphatic,   like  "a  pair." 
So  "we"  is  emphatic  in,  "all  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,"  and 
in  Hamlet,  ii.  2.  151,  in  both  cases,  because  of  antithesis. 
"  Into  the  madness  wherein  now  he  raves 
And  all  we  mourn  for." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  151.     (See  240. ) 


COMPOUND  WORDS. 

428.  Hybrids.  The  Elizabethans  did  not  bind  themselves 
by  the  stricter  rules  of  modern  times  in  this  respect.  They 
did  not  mind  adding  a  Latin  termination  to  a  Teutonic  root, 
and  vice  versa.  Thus  Shakespeare  has  "  increaseful,"  "  bode- 
ment,"  &c.  Holland  uses  the  suffix  -fy  after  the  word  "fool "  (which 
at  all  events  does  not  come  to  us  direct  from  the  Latin),  "foolify," 
where  we  use  "stultify."  The  following  words  illustrate  the  Eliza- 
bethan licence  :  — 

"  Bi-fold."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  2.  144. 

"  Out-cept."— B.  J.  (Nares). 

"Exteriorly."— A":  J.  iv.  2.  257. 

"  Sham'st  thou  not,  knowing  whence  thou  art  extraughtl" 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  2.  142. 

where  there  is  a  confusion  between  the  Latin  "extracted"  and  the 
English  "raught,"  past  part,  of  "reach."  Compare  Pistol's  "ex- 
hale," Hen.  V.  ii.  i.  66,  i.e.  "ex-haul,"  "draw  out,"  applied  to  a 
sword. 

There  was  also  great  licence  in  using  the  foreign  words  which 
were  pouring  into  the  language. 

"  And  quench  the  sidled  fires."— Lear,  iii.  7.  61. 

"  Be  aidant  &&&  remediate." — Ib.  iv.  4.  17. 

"  Antres  vast  and  deserts  idle."—  Othello,  i.  3.  140. 


COMPOUND  WORDS.  317 

429.  Adverbial  Compounds. 

"Till  Harry's  back-rettirn." — Hen.  V.  v.  Prologue,  41. 
"Thy  here-approach"  Macb.  iv.  3.  133,  148  ;  "  Our  hence-going" 
Cymb.  iii.  2.  65  ;  "  Here- hence"  B.  J.  Poetast.  v.  I  ;  "So  that  men 
are  punish'd  for  bej 'ore-breach  of  the  king's  laws  in  now-the-king* s- 
quarrel"  Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  179,  i.e.  "the  king's  now  (present)  quarrel." 
This  last  extraordinary  compound  is  a  mere  construction  for  the 
occasion,  to  correspond  antithetically  to  "  before-breach,"  but  it 
well  illustrates  the  Elizabethan  licence. 

"  The  steep-tip  heavenly  hill." — Sonn.  7. 

"  I  must  up-fill  this  osier  cage  of  ours." — R.  and  J.  ii.  3.  7. 

"  Up-hoarded."— Hamlet,  i.  I.  136. 

"  With  hair  up-staring. " — Tempest,  i.  2.  213. 

430.  Noun-Compounds.     Sometimes   the   first  noun  may  be 
treated  as  a  genitive  used  adjectively.    (See  22.)    Thus,  "  thy  heart- 
blood"  (Rich.  II.  iv.   I.  38)   is   the   same  as  "thy  heart's  blood;" 
"  brother-loi'e"  (Hen.  VIII.  v.  3.  73),  i.e.  brother 's  love. 

So     "Any-moment-leisure" — Hamlet,  i.  3.  133. 
"This^/A/^^-proof."— M.  of  V.  L  i.  144. 
"  C7//A///<W-innocence." — M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  202. 
"All  the  region-kites" — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  607. 
"A  lion-fell."— M.  N.  D.  \.  I.  227,  i.e.  "a  lion's  skin." 
So  probably 

"Faction-traitors." — Rich.  If.  ii.  2.  57. 

"  Self "  is  used  as  a  compound  noun  in  "self-conceit,"  and  this 
explains 

"  Infusing  him  with  self-and-vain-conceit. " — Rich.  II.  iii.  2. 166. 
"  Every  minute-while" — I  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  54. 
where  "while"  has  its  original  force  as  a  noun  =  "time." 

But  often  when  a  noun  is  compounded  with  a  participle,  some 
preposition  or  other  ellipse  must  be  supplied,  as  "like"  in  our 
"stone-still"  &c.,  and  the  exact  meaning  of  the  compound  can  only 
be  ascertained  by  the  context. 

"  Wind-changing  Warwick." — 3  Hen.  VI.  v.  I.  57. 
"  My  furnace-burning  heart." — Ib.  ii.  I.  80. 
i.e.  "burning  like  a  furnace." 

"  Giant-rude"  A.  Y.  L.  iv.  3.  34  ;  "  marble-constant,"  A.  and  C. 
\.  2.  240;  "honey-heavy-dew"  J.  C.  ii.  I.  230;  so  "flower- 


3i8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

soft  hands,"  A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  215;  "maid-pale  peace,"  Rich.  II. 
iii.  3.  98  ;  "an  orphan's  water-standing  eye,"  3  Hen.  VI.  v.  6.  40, 
/.<r.  "standing  with  water;"  "weeping-ripe"  L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  274, 
"  ripe  for  weeping ;"  "thought-sick,"  Hamlet,  iii.  4.  51,  /.<?.  "as 
i.e.  Hie  result  of  thought ;"  so  "lion-sick"  Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  13,  is 
explained  lower  down,  "sick  of  proud  heart;"  " pity-pleading 
eyes,"  R.  of  L.  561,  i.e.  "  pleading  for  pity  ;"  ll  peace-parted  souls," 
Hamlet,  v.  i.  261,  i.e.  "souls  that  have  departed  in  peace;" 
"fancy-free,"  M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  164,  i.e.  "  free  from  fancy  (love)  ;" 
"child-changed father,"  Lear.  iv.  7.  17,  i.e.,  "  changed  /#  a  child." 
Or  the  noun  is  put  for  a  passive  participle  or  an  adjective. 

"  Upon  your  sword  sit  Iaurel(\z6)  victory." — A.  and  C.  i.  3. 100. 
"  The  honey  of  his  music(s\]  vows." — Hamlet,  iii.  I.  164. 
"  The  venom(ous)  clamours  of  a  jealous  woman." 

C.  ofE.  v.  I.  69;  so  R.  of  L.  850. 
"The  Carthage  queen. "-M.  N.  D.  i.  I.  173. 
"Your  Corioli  walls." — Coriol.  i.  I.  8  ;  ii.  I.  180. 
"  Our  Rome  gates. " — Ib.  iii.  3.  104. 
For  similar  examples,  see  22. 
Sometimes  the  genitive  is  used  : 

"  I'll  knock  your  knave's  pate." 

T.  of  Sh.  i.  2.  12;  C.  of  E.  iii.  I.  74. 

431.  Preposition-Compounds. 

"  An  after-dinner s  (comp.  'afternoon's')  breath." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  3.  120. 

"  At  after-supper."— Rich.  III.  iv.  3.  31  ;  M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  34. 

"  At  over-night."— A.   W.  iii.  4.  23. 

"The  falling-front  of  his  friends."—/:  of  A.  iv.  3.  400. 
The  preposition  usually  attached  to  a  certain  verb  is  sometimes 
appended  to  the  participle  of  the  verb  in  order  to  make  an  adjective. 

"  There  is  no  hoped-for  mercy."— 3  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  35. 

"  Some  never-heard-of  torturing  pain," — T.  A.  ii.  3.  285. 
for  "unheard-of." 

"  Your  sued-for  tongues." — Coriol.  ii.  3.  216. 

"  BemocKd-at  stabs." — Temp.  iii.  3.  63. 

"  The  unthought-on  accident."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  549. 

"  Your  unthought-of  Harry."—  i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  141. 


COMPOUND  WORDS.  319 

432.  Verb-Compounds.     Verbs  were  compounded  with  their 
objects  more  commonly  than  with  us. 

"  Some  carry-talc,  some  please-wan,  some  slight  zany, 

Some  inn >~/i/> It' -news." — L.  L.  L.  \.  2.  463-4. 
"  b\\  find-faults."— Hen.  V.  v.  2.  398. 

We  still  use  "mar-plot"  and  "spoil-sport."  Such  compounds 
seem  generally  depreciatory.  "  Weather-fend  "  in 

"  In  the  lime  grove  which  weather-fends  your  cell," 

Temp.  v.  i.  10. 

means  "defend  from  the  weather,"  and  stands  on  a  somewhat 
different  footing. 

One  is  disposed  to  treat  "wilful-blame"  as  an  anomalous  com- 
pound in 

"  In  faith,  my  lord,  you  are  too  wilful-blame." 

i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  177. 
like       "  A  false-heart  traitor." — 2  Hen.  VI.  v.  i.  143. 

But  "  heart"  is  very  probably  a  euphonious  abbreviation  of 
"hearted."  The  explanation  of  "too  wilful-blame"  is  to  be  sought 
in  the  common  expression  "  I  am  too  blame,"  Othello,  iii.  3.  211, 
•282  ;  M.  of  V.  v.  i.  166.  "  I  am  too  too  blame,"  is  also  found  in 
Klizahethan  authors.  It  would  seem  that,  the  "to"  in  "  I  am  to 
blame"  being  misunderstood,  "blame"  came  to  be  regarded  as  an 
adjective,  and  "to"  (which  is  often  interchanged  in  spelling  with 
"too")  as  an  adverb.  Hence  "blame,"  being  regarded  as  an 
adjective,  was  considered  compoundable  with  another  adjective. 

433.  Participial   Nouns.     A   participle   or  adjective,    when 
used  as  a  noun,  often  receives  the  inflection  of  the  possessive  case 
or  the  plural. 

"  His  choseiis  merit." — B.  and  F.  F.  Sh.  iii.  I. 
"  All  cniels  else  subscribed." — Lear,  iii.  7.  65. 

i.e.  "  All  cruel  acts  to  the  contrary  being  yielded  up,  forgiven." 
Compare  for  the  meaning  Lear,  iv.  7.  36,  and  for  "  subscribe," 
7V.  and  Cr.  iv.  5.  105.  Another  explanation  is,  "all  other  cruel 
animals  being  allowed  entrance." 

So  "  Vulgars"  W.  T.  ii.  i.  94  ;  "  Swerals,"  Hen.  V.  i.  I.  86,  i.e. 
"details." 

"  Yon  equal /0Aw/r."— K.  J.  ii.  I.  357. 

"To  the  ports 
The  discontents  repair." — A.  and  C.  i.  4.  39. 


320  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Lead  me  to  the  rei'olts  (revolters)  of  England  here." 

K.  J.  v.  4.  7  :  so  Cymb.  jv.  4.  6. 
Add,  if  the  text  be  correct  : 

"The  Norway s'M\i\g."— Macbeth,  i.  2.  59. 
i.e.  "  the  king  of  the  Norwegians." 

It  would  appear  as  though  an  adjective  in  agreement  with  a  plural 
noun  received  a  plural  inflection  in 

"  'Letters-patents."— ffen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  249  ;  Rich.  IL  ii.  I. 
202  (Folio),  3.  130. 

More  probably  the  word  was  treated  by  Shakespeare  as  though 
it  were  a  compound  noun.  But  in  E.  E.  adjectives  of  Romance 
origin  often  take  the  plural  inflection. 

"  Lawless  resohttes."— Hamlet,  i.  I.  98. 
"  Mighty  opposite*."— Ib.  v.  ii.  62. 

434.  Phrase-Compounds.  Short  phrases,  mostly  containing 
participles,  are  often  compounded  into  epithets. 

"  The  always-wind-obeying  deep." — C.  of  E.  i.  I.  64. 

"  My  too-much-changed  son." — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  36. 

"  The  ne  er-yet-beaten  horse  of  Parthia." — A.  and  C.  iii.  I.  33. 

"  Our  past-cure  malady." — A.  W.  ii.  I.  124. 

"  k  past-saving  slave." — Ib.  iv.  3.  158. 

"  The  none-sparing  war. " — Ib.  iii.  2.  108. 

"  A  jewel  in  a  ten-times-barred-up  chest." — Rich.  II.  i.  1. 180. 

*'  A  too-long-wither1  d flower. " — Ib.  ii.  I.  134. 

"  Tempt  him  not  so  too-far." — A.  and  C.  i.  3.  11. 

"  The  to-and-fro-co nflicting  wind. " — Lear,  iii.  I.  11. 

"  You  that  have  turn'd  off  &first-so  noble  wife." 

A.  W.M.  3.  220. 

"  Of  this  yet-scarce-cold  battle. "~Cymb.  v.  5.  469. 

"  A  cunning  thief,  or  a-that-way-accomplished  courtier." 

Ib.  \.  4.  101. 

"  In  this  so-never-needed  help." — Coriol.  v.  I.  34. 

"  A  world-without-end  bargain." — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  799. 
Sec  Sonn.  5. 

"  Our  not-fearing  Britain." — Cymb.  ii.  4.  191. 

"  The  ne ' er-lust--wearied  Antony."— A.  and  C.  ii.  i.  38. 

"A  i-wenty-years-removed  thing  ." — 7!  N.  v.  i.  92. 


PREFIXES.  321 

435.  Anomalous  Compounds.  We  still,  though  rarely,  abbre- 
viate "the  other"  into  "t'other,"  but  we  could  not  say 

"  The  t'other." — B.  J.  Cy's.   Rev.  iv.  I  ;  v.   I   (a  corruption 

of  E.  E.  t>et  ofcer). 

"  Yea,  and  furr'd  moss  when  winter  flowers  are  none, 
To  iiriiitiT-grvund  thy  corpse." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  229. 

i.e.  perhaps  "to  inter  during  -winter :"     So  "  to  winter-rig  "  is  said 
(llalliwell)  to  mean  "  to  fallow  land  during  winter." 
"  And"  is  omitted  in 

"  At  this  odd-even  and  dull  watch  of  the  night." 

Othello,  i.  I.  124. 

Cicero  says,  that  the  extreme  test  of  a  man's  honesty  is  that  you 
can  play  at  odd  and  even  with  him  in  the  dark.  And  perhaps 
"  odd-(and-)even  "  here  means,  a  time  when  there  is  no  distinguish- 
ing between  odd  and  ei v;/. 

As  there  is  a  noun  "  false-play,"  there  is  nothing  very  remarkable 
in  its  being  converted  thus  into  a  verb  : 

"  Pack'd  cards  with  Csesar  and  false-played  my  glory." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  14.  19. 

A  terse  compound  is  often  invented  for  special  use,  made  intelli- 
gible by  the  context.     Thus,  the  profit  of  excess  is  called 
"  Poor -rich  gain." — R.  of  L.  140. 
"  \Vhere  shall  I  live  now  Lucrece  is  unlived." — Ib.  1754. 


PREFIXES. 
A-.    See  24. 

436.  All-to   (see  28)   is  used  in    the     sense  of  "  completely 
asunder  "  as  a  prefix  in 

"  And  rt//-A?-brake  his  skull."— Judges  ix.  53. 
"Asunder"  was  an  ordinary  meaning  of  the  prefix  "to"  in  E.  E. 
It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  all  had  no  necessary  connection  with 
tO)  till  by  constant  association  the  two  syllables  were  corrupted  into 
a  prefix,  ail-to,  which  was  mistaken  for  altogether  and  so  used. 
Hence,  by  corruption,  in  many  passages,  where  ail-to  or  ail-too  is 
said  to  have  the  meaning  of  "asunder,"  it  had  come  to  mean 
"altogether,"  as  in 

"  Mercutio's  ycy  hand  had  al-to  frozen  mine." — HALLI\YFU.. 
Y 


322  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

It  has  been  shown  (73)  that  too  and  to  are  constantly  interchanged 
in  Elizabethan  authors.  Hence  the  constant  use  of  all  too  for  "  quite," 
"  decidedly  too,"  as  in  Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  28,  "all  too  base,"  may  have 
been  encouraged  by  the  similar  sound  of  ail-to.  Shakespeare  does 
not  use  the  archaic  ail-to  in  the  sense  of  "asunder,"  nor  does 
Milton  probably  in 

"  She  plumes  her  feathers  and  lets  grow  her  wings, 
That  in  the  various  bustle  of  resort 
Were  all  too  ruffled." — MILTON,  Comus,  376. 

437.  At-  in  "attask'd,"Z«ir,  i.  4.  366  ("task'd,"  "blamed"), 
perhaps  represents  the  O.E.  intensive  prefix  "of,"  which  is  some- 
times changed  into  "an-,"  "on-,"  or  "a-."     But  the  word  is  more 
probably  a  sort   of  imitation  of  the  similar  words  "attach"  and 
"attack." 

438.  Be.     The  prefix  be  is  used,  not  merely  with  verbs  of  colour- 
ing, "smear,"  "splash,"  &c.,  to  localize  and  sometimes  to  intensify 
action,  but  also  with  nouns  and  adjectives  to  convert  the  nouns  into 
verbs  : 

"/fcmonster." — Lear,  iv.  2.  63. 

"Zfcsort."— Ib.  i.  4.  272. 

"All  good  ^-fortune  you." — T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  3.  41. 

"  .^femadding. " — Lear,  iii.  I.  38. 

It  is  also  used  seemingly  to  give  a  transitive  signification  to  verbs 
that,  without  this  prefix,  mostly  require  prepositions  : 

"Be£c\a.vf."—Rich.  III.  i.  3.  221. 

"2fehowls  the  moon."— M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  379. 

"  ^<?speak  "  and  "  address"  in  Hamlet,  ii.  2.  140. 

"  Aweep."— Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  49  ;  Lear,  i.  4.  324. 
In   participles,  like  other  prefixes,   it   is   often  redundant,  and 
seems  to  indicate  an  unconscious  want  of  some  substitute  for  the  old 
participial  prefix. 

"Well^-met."— Lear,  v.  I.  20. 

But  the  theory  that  be-  in  "become,"  "believe,"  "belove,"  &c., 
represents  the  old  ge-,  does  not  seem  to  be  sound. 

439.  Dis-  was  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of  un-,  to  mean 
"  without,"  as 

"Ztecompanied,"    Cy.'s  Rev.  iii.  3,  for  "unaccompanied," 
i.e.   "without  company." 


PREFIXES.  323 

"A  little  to  dwquantity  your  train." — Lear,  i.  4.  270. 
"Ztohabited,"  A".  J.  ii.  I.  220,  =  "Caused  to  migrate." 
"Z?wlived,"  CHAPMAN,  =  " Deprived  of  life." 
"Ztonatured,"  Lear,  i.  4.  305,  for  "Unnatural." 
"Ztonoble,"  HOLLAND;   "Ztotemperate,"    RALEIGH; 

for  "ignoble"  and  "intemperate." 
"  Being  full  of  supper  and  dwtempering  draughts." 

Othello,  i.  i.  99. 

" Discovery "  is  often  used  for  "uncovering,"  i.e.  "unfold," 
whether  literally  or  metaphorically.  "  So  shall  my  anticipation 
prevent  your  discovery"  Hamlet,  ii.  2.  305,  i.e.  "render  your  dis- 
closure  needless  by  anticipation. "  So  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  240. 

440.  En-  was  frequently  used,  sometimes  in  its  proper  sense  of 
enclosing,  as  "<?«closed,"  "wgiiard,"  Lear,  i.  4.  349;  "weave," 
Othello,  iv.  i..  82;  "How  dread  an  army  hath  ^/rounded  him," 
lien.  V.  iv.  Prol.  36;  "mwheel  thee  round,"  Othello,  ii.  I.  87  ; 
"ev/fetter'd,"  ib.  ii.  3.  351  ;  "wmesh,"  ib.  368  ;  "wrank,"  I  Hen. 
VI.  i.  i.  115  ;  "wshelter'd  and  mbay'd,"  Othello,  ii.  I.  18  ;  "en- 
steep'd,"  ib.  70;  "<wgaol'd,"  Rich.  //.'i.  3.  166;  "^/scheduled," 
Hen.  V.  v.  2.  73;  "^shelled,"  Coriol.  iv.  6.  45.  So  "  ein- 
bound,"  "  wvassell'd,"  DANIEL  on  Florio  ;  "^/battle"  (to  put  iu 
battle  array);  "r;/free"  (to  place  in  a  state  of  freedom) ;  "  en- 
tame,"  A.  Y.  L.  iii.  5.  48  (to  bring  into  a  state  of  lameness). 
But  the  last  instances  show  that  the  locative  sense  can  be 
metaphorical  instead  of  literal,  and  scarcely  perceptible.  There 
is  little  or  no  difference  between  "free"  and  "^wfree."  So 
"the  Bridged  sea,"  Lear,  iv.  6.  71  ;  "  the  ^wchafed  flood,"  Othello, 
ii.  i.  17,  are,  perhaps,  preferred  by  Shakespeare  merely  because 
in  participles  he  likes  some  kind  of  prefix  as  a  substitute  for  the 
old  participial  prefix.  In  some  cases  the  en-  or  in-  seems  to  take  a 
person  as  its  object,  "wdart,"  R.  and  J.  i.  3.  98  ("to  set  darts  /'//," 
not  "/«  darts").  So  "wpierced,"  R.  ami  J.  i.  4.  19;  and  so, 
perhaps,  "rwpoison."  The  word  "impale"  is  used  by  Shake- 
peare  preferably  in  the  sense  of  "surrounding:" 

"/wpale  him  with  your  weapons  round  about," 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  7.  5. 
means  "  hedge  him  round  with  your  weapons."     So 

"  Did  I  ////pale  him  with  the  regal  crown." — 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3. 189. 


324  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

441.  For-  is  used  in  two  words  now  disused  : 

"  Forslow  no  longer." — 3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  3.  56. 
« 'She>rdid  herself. "—Lear,  v.  3.  255  ;  M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  381. 
In  both  words  the  prefix  has  its  proper  sense  of  "  injury." 

442.  Un-  for  modern  in- ;  in-  for  un-.   (Non-  only  occurs  twice 
in  all  the  plays  of  Shakespeare,  and  in  V.  and  A.  521.) 

///charitable,  ///fortunate,  ///certain,  ///grateful,  ///civil,  ///- 
substantial. 

^///possible,  ////perfect,  ////provident,  ////active,  ////expressive, 
////proper,  ////respective,  ////violable,  ////partial,  ////fallible, 
////dividable,  ////constant,  ////curable,  ////effectual,  ////measur- 
able, ////disposed,  ////vincible  (N.  P.  181),  */>/reconcil/able 
(A.  and  C.  v.  i.  47). 

\Ve  appear  to  have  no  definite  rule  of  distinction  even  now,  since 
we  use  ////grateful,  ///gratitude  ;  ////equal,  ///equality.  *  Un-  seems  to 
have  been  preferred  by  Shakespeare  before  p  and  r,  which  do  not 
allow  ///-  to  precede  except  in  the  form  ////-.  ///-  also  seems  to  have 
been  in  many  cases  retained  from  the  Latin,  as  in  the  case  of 
"///gratus,"  "///fortunium,*'  &c.  As  a  general  rule,  we  now  use 
/'//-  where  we  desire  to  make  the  negative  a  part  of  the  word, 
and  ////-  where  the  separation  is  maintained — "////true,"  "///firm." 
Hence  un-  is  always  used  with  participles — "  ////tamed,"  &c. 
Perhaps  also  «//-  is  stronger  than  ///%  "£///holy"  means  more 
than  "not  holy,"  almost  "the  reverse  of  holy."  But  in  "/'«- 
attentive,"  "///temperate,"  ///- has  nearly  the  same  meaning,  "the 
reverse  of." 

"  You  wrong  the  reputation  of  your  name 
In  so  umeeming  to  confess  receipt." — L.  L.  L.  ii.  I.  156. 

1  lore  "unseeming"  means  "the  reverse  of  seeming"  more  than 
"not  seeming"  (like  oti  <f>7j/u)  :  "in  thus  making  us  as  though  you 
would  not  confess." 

SUFFIXES. 

443.  -Er  is  sometimes  appended  to  a  noun  for  the  purpose  of 
signifying  an  agent.     Thus — 

"A  Roman  sworckr." — 2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  135. 

*  This  however  's   perhaps   explained    below.     In-   is   a   part   of    the   novrt 
"  ingratitude  ; "  un-  in  the  adjective  '*  »«grateful "  means  "not." 


SUFFIXES.  325 

"  O  most  gentle  pulpiter."— A.   Y.  L.  iii.  2.  163. 
"A  morale."—  Othello,  ii.  3.  301. 

"  Homage." — A.  and  C.  i.  I.  31.     (O.  Fr.  "homagier.") 
"  Justice."— Lear,  iv.  2.  79.     (Late  Lat.  "justitiarius.") 
In  the  last  two  instances  the  -er  is  of  French  origin,  and  in  many 
cases,  as  in  "  enchants,"  it  may  seem  to  be  English,  while  really  it 
represents  the  French  -eur. 

"Jointkr,"  T.  N.  v.  I.  160,  perhaps  comes  from  the  French 
"joindre." 

The  -er  is  often  added  to  show  a  masculine  agent  where  a  noun 
and  verb  are  identical  : 

"Trusts." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  172. 
"  The  paus^r  reason." — Macbeth,  ii.  3.  117. 
"Cau-vr."— Rich.  777.  iv.  4.  122. 
"To  you,  my  origin  and  end^r." — L.  C.  ii.  22. 
Note  the  irregular,  "Precurrer"  (for  "precursor"). — P.  P. 

We  have  "  windring"  from  "winder,"  Tempest,  iv.  I.  128,  formed 
after  the  analogy  of  "wander,"  "  clamber,"  "  wav^r,"  the  er  having 
apparently  a  frequentative  force. 

444.  -En,  made  of  (still  used  in  golden,  &c.),  is  found  in — 

"  Her  threads  fillet."— L.  C.  5. 

"A  twiggfa  bottle." — Othello,  iii.  3.  152. 

445,  -Ive,  -ble.     (See  3.)     -Ive  is  sometimes  used  in  a  passive 
instead  of,  as  now,  in  an  active  signification.     Thus  :  "  Incompre- 
hcns/Vv  depths  ;"   "plaur/z^,"  "  worthy  to  be  applauded  ;"    "direc- 
tive,"  "  capable  of  being  directed  ;"   "  insuppress/zr  metal ;"   "the 
fair,  the  inexpressttv  she  "  (similarly  used  by  Milton  in  the  Hymn 
on  the  Nativity).   On  the  other  hand,  -ble  is  sometimes  used  actively, 
as  in  "medicinal"  (which  is  also  used  passively),  and  in  "un- 
merita/'A'. " 

"  This  is  a  slight  unmeritable  man." — J.  C.  iv.  i.  12. 
So  "defensible,"  " deceivable, "  "disputable,"  and  "tenable." 

In  "Intern^  sieve,"  A,  W.  i.  2.  208,  not  only  does  -ble  convey 
an  active  meaning,  but  Shakespeare  uses  the  Latin  instead  of  the 
English  form  of  the  termination,  just  as  we  still  write  "terrible," 
not  "terrable."  I  imagine  we  have  been  influenced  in  our  -able  by 
the  accidental  coincidence  of  meaning  between  the  word  "able" 


326  .SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

and  the  termination  -ble.    But  French  influence  must  have  had  some 
weight. 

446.  -Less.     Sometimes  found  with  adjectives,  as  "busy/m," 
"  sick/m,"  "  modest/^j. " 

-Less  used  for  "not  able  to  be." 

"That  phrase/m  hand."— L.  C.  22$',  i.e.  "  in-describable." 

"That  termless  skin." — Ib.  94. 

"Sum/£M  treasuries." — Hen.  V.  i.  2.  165. 

"My  care/m  crime." — R.  of  L.  771. 

"Your  great  oppose/m  wills." — Lear,  iv.  6.  38. 
It  is  commonly  used  with  words  of  Latin  or  Greek  origin,  as  above. 
Add  "  reason/aw,"  /&».    V.  v.  4-  137;  "crime/m,"  2  /few.   F7. 
ii.  4.  63. 

447.  -Ly  found  with  a  noun,  and  yet  not  appearing  to  convey 
an  adjectival  meaning.     "  Anger-/j/,"  Macb.  iii.  5.  1  ;    T.  G.  of  V. 
i.  2.   62.      Compare    "wonder-//"   in   the  Morte  a"  Arthur,    and 
"cheer-//,"  Tempest,  i.  I.  6.     This  is  common  in  E.  E. 

The  -ly  represents  "  like,"  of  which  it  is  a  corruption.    Compare  : 

"  Villain-like he  lies."— Lear,  v.  3.  97. 

So  "master//,"  adv.,  W.  T.  v.  3.  65  ;  Othello,  i.  I.  26  ;  "hunger//," 
adv.,  ib.  iii.  4. 105  ;  "  exterior/y,"  adv.,  K.  J.  iv.  2.  257  ;  "  silver/j/," 
adv.,  ib.  v.  2.  46.  "Fellow//,"  Temp.  v.  i.  64,  and  "traitor//," 
W.  T.  iv.  4.  822,  are  used  as  adjectives.  Perhaps  a  vowel  is  to  be 
supplied  in  sound,  though  omitted,  in  "unwield(i)//,"  Rich.  II. 
iv.  i.  205;  "need(i)//,"  R.  and  J.  iii.  2.  117  ;  and  they  may  be 
derived  from  "unwieldy"  and  "needy."  Add  "orderly,"  Rich.  II. 
i.  3.  9;  " manly, "Macbeth,  iv.  3.  235. 

448.  -Ment.     We  seldom  use  this  suffix  except  where  we  find  it 
already  existing  in  Latin  and  French  words  adopted  by  us.     Shake- 
speare, however,  has  "  intend  ment,"  "  supply  ment, "  "  design  ment" 
*'  denotew^w/, "  and  "bode»^«/." 

449.  -NeSS  is  added  to  a  word  not  of  Teutonic  origin  : 

"  Equal«m."— A.  and  C.  v.  I.  47. 

450.  -Y  is  found  appended  to  a  noun  to  form  an  adjective. 

"Slumber/ agitation." — Macbeth,  v.  I.  12. 
"  Unheed/  haste."— M.  N.  D.  i.  i.  237. 


SUFFIXES.  327 

In  "  Bat/y  wings,"  M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  365,  "bat/y"  seems  to  mean 
"like  those  of  bats."  "Wormy  beds,"  #.  iii.  2.  384,  is  "  -worm-filled. " 
"Vasty,"  in  "the  vasty  fields  of  France,"  Hen,  V.  Prologue,  12  ; 
I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  52,  is  perhaps  derived  from  the  noun  "vast," 
Tempest,  i.  2.  327  ;  Hamlet,  i.  2.  198.  "  Womby  vaultages," 
Henry  V.  ii.  4.  124:  i.e.  "womb-like." 

Y  appended  to  adjectives  of  colour  has  a  modifying  force  like  -ish  : 
"  Their  paly  flames.  "—Hen.  V.  iv.  Prol.  8. 
"  His  browny  locks." — L.  C.  85. 

451.  Suffixes  were  sometimes  influenced  by  the  Elizabethan 
licence  of  converting  one  part  of  speech  into  another.  We  should 
append  -ation  or  -ition,  -ure  or  -ing,  to  the  following  words  used  by 
Shakespeare  as  nouns:  "solicit,"  "consult,"  "expect,"  &c.  ;  "my 
depart?  2  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  2 ;  3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  92,  ii.  I.  110 ;  "  un- 
curable  discomfort"  2  Hen.  VI.  v.  2.  86  ;  "  make  prepare  for  war," 
3  lien.  VI.  iv.  I.  131 ;  "a  smooth  dispose?  Othello,  i.  3.  403  ;  "his 
repair?  3  Hen.  VI.  v.  i.  20  ;  "deep  exclaims?  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  52, 
iv.  4.  135  ;  "his  brow's  repine?  V.  and  A.  490  ;  "  a  sweet  retire? 
Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  86  ;  "false  accuse?  2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  160  ;  "your 
ladyship's  impose?  T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  3.  8  ;  "  the  sun's  appear? '  B.  and 
F.  F.  Sh.  v.  I ;  "from  suspect?  2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  139  ;  "  manage? 
M.  of  V.  iii.  4.  25  ;  "  commends?  ib.  ii.  I.  90  ;  "  the  boar's  annoy? 
Rich.  III.  v.  3.  156;  "the  disclose?  Hamlet,  iii.  I.  174;  "com- 
mends? Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  126. 

Almost  all  of  these  words  come  to  us  through  the  French. 

Note  "  O  heavenly  mingle." — A.  and  C.  i.  5.  59. 
"  Immomcnt  toys." — Ib.  v.  I.  106. 


PROSODY. 

452.  The  Ordinary  line  in  blank  verse  consists  of  five  feet  of 
two  syllables  each,  the  second  syllable  in  each  foot  being  accented. 

"  We  both  |  have  fed  |  as  well,  j  and  we  |  can  both 
Endure  |  the  wint  I  er's  cold  |  as  well  |  as  he." 

J.  C.  i.  2.  98-9. 

This  line  is  too  monotonous  and  formal  for  frequent  use.  The 
metre  is  therefore  varied,  sometimes  (l)  by  changing  the  position  of 
the  accent,  sometimes  (2)  by  introducing  trisyllabic  and  monosyllabic 
feet.  These  licences  are,  however,  subject  to  certain  laws.  It  would 
be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare  in  his  tragic  metre 
introduces  the  trisyllabic  or  monosyllabic  foot  at  random.  Some 
sounds  and  collections  of  sounds  are  peculiarly  adapted  for  mono- 
syllabic and  trisyllabic  feet.  It  is  part  of  the  purpose  of  the 
following  paragraphs  to  indicate  the  laws  which  regulate  these 
licences.  In  many  cases  it  is  impossible  to  tell  whether  in  a  tri- 
syllabic foot  an  unemphatic  syllable  is  merely  slurred  or  wholly 
suppressed,  as  for  instance  the  first  e  in  "different."  Such  a  foot 
may  be  called  either  dissyllabic  or  quasi-trisyllabic. 

453.  The    accent   after   a  pause   is   frequently  on  the   first 
syllable.     The  pause  is  generally  at  the  end  of  the  line,  and  hence 
it  is  on  the  first  foot  of  the  following  line  that  this,  which  may  be 
called  the  "pause-accent,"  is  mostly  found.      The  first  syllable  of 
initial   lines   also   can,    of  course,  be   thus  accented.     It    will   be 
seen  that  in  the  middle  of  the  line  these  pause-accents  generally 
follow  emphasized  monosyllables.     (See  480-6. ) 

"  Cdmfort,  |  my  liege!  |  why  looks  |  your  grace  |  so  pale?" 

Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  75. 

Examples  of  the  "pause-accent"  not  at  the  beginning, 
(i)  "Feed  and  |  regard  |  him  not.  |   Are  you  \  a  man?" 

Macbeth,  iii.  4.  58. 


PROSODY.  329 

Sometimes  the  pause  is  slight,  little  more  than  the  time  necessary 
for  recovery  after  an  emphatic  monosyllable. 

(2)  "  Be  in  |  their  flow  |  ing  cups  \frhhly  \  remember'd." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  55. 
So  arrange 

"  And  these  \flatter  \  ing  streams,  |  and  make  |  our  faces." 

Macbeth,  iii.  2.  33. 

"  These  "  may  be  emphasized.     (See  484. ) 

(3)  "  Who  would  |  believe  |  me.     O' !  |  pfril  \  ous  mouths." 

M.forM.  ii.  4.  172. 

(4)  "  Affec  |  tion,   pooh!  |  You  speak  |  — like  a  \  green  girl." 

IIamlet,'\.  3.  101. 
"We  shall  [  be  call'd  |  — piirgers,  \  not  mur  |  derers." 

J.  C.  ii.  I.  180. 

(5)  "The  life  |  of  com  |  fort.     But  |  for  thee,  \fMow." 

Cymb.  iv.  3.  9. 
The  old  pronunciation  "  fellow"  is  probably  not  Shakespearian. 

In  (3)  (4)  and  (5)  "  0"  "speak,"  "call'd,"  and  "thee"  may, 
perhaps,  be  regarded  as  dissyllables  (see  482-4),  and  the  following 
foot  a  quasi-trisyllabic  one.  There  is  little  practical  difference 
between  the  two  methods  of  scansion. 

(6)  "  Senseless  |  linen!  \  Happier  |  therein  |  than  I." 

Cymb.  i.  3.  7. 

Here  either  there  is  a  pause  between  the  epithet  and  noun,  or 
else  "senseless"  may  possibly  be  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable, 
"  Sense  (486)  |  less  linen."  The  line  is  difficult. 

"  Thercfdrc,  \  merchant,  \  I'll  lira  |  it  thee  |  this  day," 

C.  of  £.  i.  i.  151. 

seems  to  begin  with  two  trochees,  like  Milton's  famous  line  : 

"  U'ni  |  versa!  \  reproach  |  far  worse  |  to  bear." — P.  L.  vi.  34. 
But  "  therefore"  may  have  its  accent,  as  marked,  on  the  last 
syllable. 

The  old  pronunciation  "  merchant "  is  not  probable.  Or  "  there  " 
may  be  one  foot  (see  480) :  "  There  |  fore  merchant  |  ." 

(7)  "Ant.  Obey  |  it  on  |  all  cause.  | 

Cleop.  Pardon,  |  pardon. 

A.  and  C.  iii.  II.  68. 

is,  perhaps,  an  instance  of  two  consecutive  trochees.     (There  seems 
no  ground  for  supposing  that  "pardon"  is  to  be  pronounced  as  in 


33o  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

French.)     But  if  the  diphthong  "cause"   be  pronounced  as  a  dis- 
syllable (see  484),  the  difficulty  will  be  avoided. 

We  find,  however,  a  double  trochee  (unless  "my"  has  dropped 

out)  in 

"  Sec.  Cit.  Cse'sar  |  has  had  |  great  wrong.  | 
Third  Cit.  Has  he,     masters? 

J.  C.  iii.  2.  115. 

Even  here,  however,  "  wrong  "  may  be  a  quasi-dissyllable  (486). 
(8)  Between  noun  and  participle  a  pause  seems  natural.     Often 
the  pause  represents  "in"  or  "a-"  (178). 

"Thy  knee  |  bussing  \  the  stones." — Coriol.  iii.  2.  75. 
"The  smile  |  m6cking\  the  sigh." — Cyinb.  iv.  2.  54. 
"My  wind  |  c6oling  \  my  broth."— M.  of  V.  i.  I.  22. 
In  these  lines  the  foot  following  the  emphasized  monosyllable  may 
(as  an  alternative  to  the  "pause-accent  ")  be  regarded  as  quasi-trisyl- 
labic. 

453  a,  Emphatic  Accents.  The  syllable  that  receives  an 
accent  is  by  no  means  necessarily  emphatic.  It  must  be  emphatic 
relatively  to  the  unaccented  syllable  or  syllables  in  the  same  foot,  but  it 
may  be  much  less  emphatic  than  other  accented  syllables  in  the 
same  verse.  Thus  the  last  syllable  of  "  injuries,"  though  accented, 
is  unemphatic  in 

"The  in  I  iur&r  I  that  they  I  themselves  |  procure." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  303. 

Mr.  Ellis  (Early  English  Pronunciation,  part  i.  p.  334)  says  that 
"  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  there  are  commonly  or  regularly 
five  stresses,  one  to  each  measure."  From  an  analysis  of  several 
tragic  lines  of  Shakespeare,  taken  from  different  plays,  I  should  say 
that  rather  less  than  one  of  three  has  the  full  number  of  five  emphatic 
accents.  About  two  out  of  three  have  four,  and  one  out  of  fifteen 
has  three.  But  as  different  readers  will  emphasize  differently,  not 
much  importance  can  be  attached  to  such  results.  It  is  of  more 
importance  to  remember,  ( i )  that  the  first  foot  almost  al  ways  has  an 
emphatic  accent ;  (2)  that  two  unemphatic  accents  rarely,  if  ever, 
come  together  ("  for  "  may  perhaps  be  emphatic  in 

"  Hear  it  |  not,  Dun  |  can  ;  for  |  it  is  |  a  knell." 

Macbeth,  ii.  I.  63) ; 

and  (3)  that  there  is  generally  an  emphatic  accent  on  the  third  or 
fourth  foot 


PROSODY.  331 

The  five  emphatic  accents  are  common  in  verses  that  have  a  pause- 
accent  at  the  beginning  or  in  the  middle  of  the  line. 

"  Ndture  \  seems  dead,  |  and  wick  |  ed  dreams  |  abuse." 

Macbeth,  ii.  I.  50. 

"  The  hand  |  le  toward  |  my  hand.  |  C6me,   let  \  me  clutch 
thee." — Ib.  ii.  i.  34. 

And  in  antithetical  lines  : 

"  I  hd-ve  |  thee  n6t,  |  and  ye"t  |  I  see  \  thee  still." 

Macbeth,  ii.  I.  35. 

" Bring  with  |  thee  airs  \  from  heaven  \  or  blasts  \  from  hell" 

Hamlet,  i.  4.  41. 

454.  An   extra   Syllable  is  frequently  added  before"  a  pause, 
especially  at  the  end  of  a  line  : 

(a)  "'Tis  not  |  alone  |  my  ink  |  y  cloak,  |  good  mother." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  77. 
but  also  at  the  end  of  the  second  foot : 

(b)  "For  mine  |  own  safe/&y;  |  you  may  |  be  right  |  ly  just" 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  30. 
and,  less  frequently,  at  the  end  of  the  third  foot : 

(c)  "For  good  I  ness  dares  |  not   check  thee;  \  wear  thou  |  thy 

wrongs.   — Macbeth,  iv.  3.  33. 
and,  rarely,  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  foot  : 

(d)  "With  all  |  my  hon  |  ours  on  |  my  brother:  |  where6n." 

Temp.  i.  2.  127. 
But  see  466. 

"  So  clear  |  the  love  |  my  peo  |  pie  bore  me :  \  nor  set." 

Ib.  i.  2.  141. 

455.  The  extra  syllable  is  very  rarely  a  monosyllable, 

still  more  rarely  an  emphatic  monosyllable.  The  reason  is  obvious. 
Since  in  English  we  have  no  enclitics,  the  least  emphatic  mono- 
syllables will  generally  be  prepositions  and  conjunctions.  These 
carry  the  attention  forward  instead  of  backward,  and  are  therefore 
inconsistent  with  a  pause,  and  besides  to  some  extent  emphatic. 

The  fact  that  in  Henry  VIII.,  and  in  no  other  play  of  Shake- 
speare's, constant  exceptions  are  found  to  this  rule,  seems  to  me  a 
sufficient  proof  that  Shakespeare  did  not  write  that  play. 

"Go  give  |  'em  wel  |  come ;  you  |  can  speak  |  the  French 

tongue."— Hen.  VIII.  i.  4.  57. 

"Fell  by  |  our  serv  j  ants,  by  |  those  men  |  we  lov'd  most." 

Ib.  ii.  i.  122. 


332  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Be   sure  I  you    be  |  not    loose  ;  |  for    those  |  you    make 

friends:'— Hen.  VIIL  ii.  I.  127. 

"To  si  |  lence  en  |  vious  tongues.  |  Be  just  |  and  fear  not" 

Ib,  iii.  2.  447. 

So/fo*.  VIIL  ii.  I.  67,  78,  97  ;  and  seven  times  in  iii.  2.  442-451  ; 

eight  times  in  iv.  2.  51-80. 

Even  where  the  extra  syllable  is   not  a  monosyllable  it  occurs 

so  regularly,  and  in  verses  of  such  a  measured  cadence,  as  almost 

to  give  the  effect  of  a  trochaic*  line  with  an  extra  syllable  at  the 

beginning,  thus  : 

"  In  II  all  my  |  miser  |  ies ;  but  |  thou  hast  |  forced  me 
Out  II  of  (45  7  a)  thy  |  honest  |  truth  to  |  play  the  |  woman. 
Let's  II  dry  our  |  eyes  :  and  |  thus  far  |  hear  me,  |  Cromwell : 
And  ||  when  1  |  am  for-  |  gotten,  |  as  I  |^  shall  be, 
And  ||  sleep  in  |  dull  cold  |  marble  |  where  no  |  mention 
Of  II  me  must  |  more  be  |  heard  of,  |  say  I  |  taught  thee. 
Say,  ||  Wolsey,  |  that  once  |  trod  the  |  ways  of  |  glory 
And  ||  sounded     all  the  |  depths  and  |  shoals  of  I  honour, 
Found  ||  thee  a    way,  out  |  of  (457  a)  his  |  wreck,  to  |  rise  in 
A  ||  sure  and  I  safe  one,  I  though  thy  |  master  |  missed  it." 
Hen.   VIIL  iii.  2.  430-9. 

It  may  be  safely  said  that  this  is  not  Shakespearian. 
"  Boy"  is  unaccented  and  almost  redundant  in 

"I  part  I  ly  know  I  the  man  :  |  go   call  |  him  hither,  boy." 

(Folio)  Rich.  III.  iv.  2.  41. 

(Hither,  a  monosyllable,  see  189.)     And  even  here  the  Globe  is, 
perhaps,  right  in  taking  "  Boy  exit"  to  be  a  stage  direction. 

In     "Bid    him  I  make    haste  |  and    meet  |  me    at  |  the   North 

gate,"—  T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  1.258. 

"gate"  is  an  unemphatic  syllable  in  "Northgate,"  like  our  "New- 
gate."    So 

"My  men  I  should  call  I  me  lord  :  |  I  am  |  your  good-man" 

T.  o/Sh.  Ind.  2.  107. 
"A  halt  I  er  grat  I  is  :  no  I  thing  else,  I  for  God's-sake." 

M.ofV.iv.  1.379. 

"Parts,"  like  "sides,"  is  unemphatic,  and   "both"  is  strongly 
emphasized,  in 

"  Rather  |  to  show  |  a  nob  |  le  grace  |  to  bSth  parts. " 

Coriol.  v.  3.  121. 

•The  words  "trochaic"  and  "iambic"  are  of  course  used,  when  applied  to 
English  poetry,  to  denote  accent,  not  quantity. 


PROSODY.  333 

So  "out  "  is  emphatic  in 

"  We'll  have  |  a  swash  |  ing  and  |  a  mart  |  ial  oiitsiJe" 

A.  y.  L.  i.  3.  122. 
The  's  for  "is"  is  found  at  the  end  of  a  line  in 

*'  Perceive  I  speak  sincerely,  and  high  note  's 
Ta'en  of  your  many  virtues." — Hen.  VIII.  ii.  3.  59. 

456.  Unaccented  Monosyllables.  Provided  there  be  only 
one  accented  syllable,  there  may  be  more  than  two  syllables  in 
any  foot.  "It  is  he"  is  as  much  a  foot  as  "'tis  he  ;"  "we  will 
serve  "  as  "  we'll  serve  ;"  "  it  is  over  "  as  "  'tis  o'er." 

Naturally  it  is  among  pronouns  and  the  auxiliary  verbs,  that  we 
must  look  for  unemphatic  syllables  in  the  Shakespearian  verse. 
Sometimes  the  unemphatic  nature  of  the  syllable  is  indicated  by  a 
contraction  in  the  spelling.  (See  460.)  Often,  however,  syllables 
must  be  dropped  or  slurred  in  sound,  although  they  are  expressed  to 
the  sight.  Thus  in 

"Provide  thce  \  two  prop  |  er  pal  J  freys,  black  I  as  jet," 

T.  A.  v.  2.  50. 

"thee"  is  nearly  redundant,  and  therefore  unemphatic. 
"  If"  and  "the"  are  scarcely  pronounced  in 

"  And  in  it  \  are  the  lords  |  of  York,  |  Berkeley,  |  and  Sey- 
mour."— Rich.  II,  ii.  3.  55. 
"  Mir.   I  ev  |  er  saw  |  so  noble.  | 

Prosp.  //goes  on,  |  I  s<fe."—  Temp,  i.  2.  419. 

"But  that  |  the  sea,  |  mounting  |  to  the  wel  |  kin's  cheek." 

Ib.  i.  2.  4. 

("The"  need  not  be  part  of  a  quadrisyllable  foot,  nor  be  sup- 
pressed in  pronouncing 

"  The  cur  j  iosi  |  ty  of  nd  |  tions  to  |  deprive  me." 

Lear,  L  2.  4. 
Compare,  possibly, 

"  But  I  have  ever  had  that  ctiri6s(i)ty."—R.  and  F.  (Nares). ) 
So  "to,"  the  sign  of  the  infinitive,  is  almost  always  unemphatic, 
and  is  therefore  slurred,  especially  where  it  precedes  a  vowel.    Thus  : 
"  In  seeming  |  to  augment  I  it  wastes  |  it.     Be  |  advis'd." 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  i.  145. 
where  "  in"  before  the  participle  is  redundant  and  unemphatic. 

"For  truth  |  to  (/')  over(oV;-)pe'er.  |  Rather  |  than  fool  |  it  so." 

CorioL  ii.  3.  128. 


334  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So  the  "I"  before  "beseech"  (which  is  often  omitted,  as  Temp. 
ii.  I.I),  even  when  inserted,  is  often  redundant  as  far  as  sound  goes. 

"(/)  beseech  I  your  majes  |  ty,  give  |  me  leave  |  to  go." 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  3.  20. 
"  (/)  beseech  I  your  grac  I  es  both  |  to  par  |  don  me." 

Rick.  III.  i.  i.  84.     So  Ib.  103. 
Perhaps 
"  (/)  pray  thee  (prithee}  stay  |  with  us,  |  go  not  |  to  Witt  |  enberg," 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  119. 

though  this  verse  may  be  better  scanned 
"I  pray  |  thee  stay  |  with  us,  |  go  not  |  to  Wittenberg."     See  469. 

"  Let  me  see,  !  let  me  see  ;  I  is  not  I  the  leaf  I  turn'd  down  ?" 

J.  C.  iv.  3.  273. 
So  (if  not  501) 

"  And  I'  |  will  kiss  |  thy  foot  :  J  (/)  prithee  be  |  my  god." 

Temp.  ii.  2.  152. 

"With  you"  is  "wi'  you"  (as  in  "good-bye"  for  "God  be 
with  you")  ;  "the"  is  th\  and  "of"  is  slurred  in 

"  Two  no  |  ble  part  |  ners  -with  you  ;  \  the  old   duch  |  ess 

o/ Norfolk."— Hen.  VIII.  v.  3.  168. 

To  write  these  lines  in  prose,  as  in  the  Folio  and  Globe,  makes 
an  extraordinary  and  inexplicable  break  in  a  scene  which  is  wholly 
verse. 

For  the  quasi-suppression  of  of  see 

"The  bas  |  tard  of  O'r  |  leans  I  with  him  |  is  join'd, 
The  duke  |  of  Alen  I  con  fli     eth  to  |  his  side." 

i  Hen.  VI.  i.  i.  92,  93. 

In  the  Tempest  this  use  of  unaccented  monosyllables  in  trisyllabic 
feet  is  very  common. 

"  Go  make  |  thyself  |  like  a  nymph  |  o'  the  sea;  |  be  subject 

To  no  sight  |  but  thine  |  and  mine."—  Temp.  i.  2.  301. 
Even  in  the  more  regular  lines  of  the  Sonnets  these  superfluous 
syllables  are  allowed  in  the  foot.     Thus  : 

"Excuse  |  not  si  |  lence  so;  |  for  V  lies  j  in  thee." — Sonn.  101. 
And  even  in  rhyming  lines  of  the  plays  : 

"  Call  them  |  again,  |  sweet  prince,  |  accept  |  their  suit  ; 
I'f  you  I  deny  I  them,  all  I  the  land  I  will  rue  V." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  221. 

This  sometimes  modifies  the  scansion.  "  Hour  "  is  a  dissyllable, 
and  '/  is  absorbed,  in 


PROSODY.  335 

"You  know  |  I  gave'/  |  you  half  |  an  Junl  \  r  since." 

C.  of  E.  iv.  i.  65. 

Almost  any  syllables,  however  lengthy  in  pronunciation,  can  be 
used  as  the  unaccented  syllables  in  a  trisyllabic  foot,  provided  they 
are  unemphatic.  It  is  not  usual,  however,  to  find  two  such  unaccented 
syllables  as 

"  Which  most  gib  |  ingly,  |  ungrave  |  ly  he  |  did  fashion." 

CorioL  ii.  3.  233. 

457,  Accented  monosyllables.  On  the  other  hand,  some- 
times  an  unemphatic  monosyllable  is  allowed  to  stand  in  an  em- 
phatic place,  and  to  receive  an  accent.  This  is  particularly  the  case 
with  conjunctions  and  prepositions  at  the  end  of  the  line.  We  still 
in  conversation  emphasize  the  conjunctions  "but,"  "and,"  "for," 
&c.  before  a  pause,  and  the  end  of  the  line  (which  rarely  allows 
a  final  monosyllable  to  be  light,  unless  it  be  an  extra-syllable] 
necessitates  some  kind  of  pause.  Hence 

"  This  my  mean  task 
Would  be  as  heavy  to  me  as  odious,  but 
The  mistress  which  I  serve  quickens  what's  dead." 

Temp.  iii.  i.  5. 
"Or  ere 

It  should  the  good  ship  so  have  swallow'd  and 
The  fraughting  souls  within  her." — Ib.  i.  2.  12. 
"  Freed  and  enfranchised,  not  a  party  to 
The  anger  of  the  king,  nor  guilty  of 

(If  any  be)  the  trespass  of  the  queen." — W.  T.  ii.  2.  62,  63. 
So  Temp.  iii.  2.  33,  iv.  I.  149;  W.  T.  i.  2.  372,  420,  425,  432, 
449,  461,  &c. 

The  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  capable  of  more  emphasis 
than  with  us  : 

"  Whose  shadow  the  dismissed  bachelor  loves." — Temp.  iv.  I.  67. 
"With  silken  streamers  the  young  Phoebus  fanning." 

Hen.  V.  iii.  Prol.  6. 
"  And  your  great  uncle's,  Edward  the  Black  Prince." 

Ib.  i.  i.  105,  112. 

"And   Prosp'ro  (469)  the  prime  duke,    being  (470)  so  re- 
puted."—?^;//, i.  2.  72. 

"Your  breath  first  kindled  the  dead  coal  of  war."— A".  J.  v.  2.  83. 
"  Omitting  the  sweet  benefit  of  time."—/:  G.  of  V.  ii.  4.  65. 


336  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  So  doth  the  woodbine,  the  sweet  honeysuckle." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  47. 

"Then,  my  queen,  in  silence  sad, 

Trip  we  after  the  night's  shade." — Ib.  iv.  I.  101. 
"  His  brother's  death  at  Bristol  the  Lord  Scroop." 

I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  271. 

"  So  please  you  something  touching  the  Lord  Hamlet." 

Hamlet,  i.  3.  89. 

"  Thou  hast  affected  the  fine  strains  of  honour." 

Coriol.  v.  3.  149,  151. 

In  most  of  these  cases  the  precedes  a  monosyllable  which  may 
be  lengthened,  thus  : 

"Your  breath  |  first  kindled  |  thedea  |  d  (484)  coal  |  of  war." 
So  Temp.  i.  2.  196,  204  ;  ii.  2.  164  ;  iv.  I.  153. 
Compare 

"  Oh,  weep  for  Adonais.      The  quick  dreams." 

SHELLEY,  Adonais,  82. 

But  this  explanation  does  not  avail  for  the  first  example,  nor  for 
"That  heals  the  wound  and  cures  not  the  disgrace." — Sonn.  34. 
"  More  needs  she  the  divine  than  the  physician." — Macb.  v.  i.  82. 
(Unless,  as  in  Rich.  II.  i.  I.  154,  "  physician"  has  two  accents  : 

"  More  needs  she  |  the  divine  |  than  the  |  physi  |  cian.") 
On  the  whole  there    seems  no  doubt  that  "  the  "  is   sometimes 
allowed  to  have  an  accent,  though  not  (457  a)  an  emphatic  accent. 
Scan  thus  : 

"A  devil  (466),  |  a  bor  |  n  (485)  dev  |  il  (475),   on  |  whose 

nature."—  Tempest,  iv.  i.  188. 
avoiding  the  accent  on  a. 
The  in 

"Then  meet  |  and  join.  |  Jove's  light  |  nings,^/ 1  precursors," 

Tempest,  i.  2.  201. 

seems  to  require  the  accent.  But  "  light(e)nings  "  is  a  trisyllable 
before  a  pause  in  Lear,  iv.  7.  35  (see  477),  and  perhaps  even  the 
slight  pause  here  may  jystify  us  in  scanning — 

"  Jove's  light  |  (e)nings,  |  the  precursors." 

457  a,  Accented  Monosyllabic   Prepositions,      Walker 

(Crit.  on  Shakespeare,  ii.  173-5)  proves  conclusively  that  "  of "  in 
"  out  of"  frequently  has  the  accent.  Thus  : 


PROSODY.  337 

"  The  fount  out  of  which  with  their  holy  hands." — B.  and  F. 
"  Into  a  relapse  ;  or  but  suppose  out  of." — MASSINGER. 

"  Still  walking  like  a  ragged  colt, 
And  oft  out  o/a.  bush  doth  bolt." — DRAYTON. 

Many  other  passages  quoted  by  Walker  are  doubtful,  but  he 
brings  forward  a  statement  of  Daniel,  who,  remarking  that  a  trochee 
is  inadmissible  at  the  beginning  of  an  iambic  verse  of  four  feet, 
instances  : 

"  Yearly  out  of  his  wat'ry  cell," 

which  shows  that  he  regarded  "out  of"  as  an  iambus.  Walker 
conjectures  "  that  the  pronunciation  (of  monosyllabic  prepositions) 
was  in  James  the  First's  time  beginning  to  fluctuate,  and  that  Mas- 
singer  was  a  partisan  of  the  old  mode."  Hence,  probably,  the 
prepositions  received  the  accent  in 

"  Such  men  |  as  he  |  be  ne  |  ver  dt  \  heart's  e"ase." 

J.  C.I  i.  208. 

"Therefore  (490),  |  out  6f\  thy  long  |  exper  |  ienc'd  time." 
R.  and  J.  iv.  I.  60  ;  Coriol.  i.  10.  19. 

"  Vaunt  c6ur  |  iers  t6  \  oak-cleav  |  ing  thun  J  der-bolts." 

Lear,  iii.  2.  5. 
So  Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  431,  438. 

"  To  bring  |  but  five  |  and  twen  |  ty ;  t6  \  no  more." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  251. 

"  Lor.  Who  und  |  ertakes  |  you  t6  \  your  end.  | 

Vaux.  Prepare  there."— Hen.  VIII.  ii.  2.  97. 

For  this  reason  I  think  it  probable  that  "  to  "  in  "  in-/0,"  "un-to," 
sometimes  receives  the  accent,  thus  : 

"  That  eV  |  er  love  |  did  make  |  thee  run  |  int6." 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  4.  35. 
"  Came  then  |  int6  \  my  mind,  |  and  yet  |  my  mind." 

Lear,  iv.  I.  36. 

' '  Fan  you  |  int6  \  despair.  |  Have  the  pow  |  er  still. " 

Coriol.  iii.  3.  127. 

"I  had  thought,  |  bymak  |  ing  this  J  well  known  |  w«/Jyou." 
Lear,  i.  4.  224  ;   M.ofV.v.  I.  169. 

"  By  this  |  vile  con  |  quest  shall  I  attain  |  un*6." 

J.  C.  v.  5.  38  ;   Rich.  III.  iii.  5.  109. 

"  Discuss  |  unt6  \  me.     A'rt  |  thou  off  |  icer?" 

Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  38.    (But  this  is  Pistol.) 


338  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

With  in  "  'without  "  seems  accented  in 

"That  won  |  you  with  \  out  blows."— Coriol.  iii.  3.  133. 

458.  TWO  extra  Syllables  are  sometimes  allowed,  if  un- 
emphatic,  before  a  pause,  especially  at  the  end  of  the  line.  For 
the  details  connected  with  this  licence  see  467-9,  and  494,  where 
it  will  be  seen  that  verses  with  six  accents  are  very  rare  in  Shake- 
speare, and  that  therefore  the  following  lines  are  to  be  scanned  with 
five  accents. 

"  Peruse  |  this  letter.  |  Nothing  |  almost  |  sees  miracles." 

Lear,  ii.  2.  172. 
"  Must  be  |  a  faith  |  that  rea  |  son  with  |  out  miracle." 

Ib.  i.  i.  225. 

"  Like  one  [  that  means  |  his  pro  |  per  harm  |  in  manacles." 

Coriol.  i.  9.  57. 
"  Was  duke   |    dom    large   |    enough  :  |   of  temp(o)    |   ral 

r6y allies"—  Tempest,  i.  2.  110. 
"  I  dare  |  avouch  |  it,  sir.  |  What,  fif  |  ty  followers !" 

Lear,  ii.  4.  240. 
"  You    fool  |  ish   shep  |  herd,   where  |  fore   do  |  you  fdlloiv 

her?'*— A.   Y.  L.  iii.  5.  49. 
"  Of  whom  |  he's  chief,  |  with  all  |  the  size  |  that  verity." 

Coriol.  v.  2.  18. 
"  Ely.  Incline  |  to  it,  |  or  no.  | 

Cant.  He  seems  |  indifferent."— Hen.   V.\.\.  72. 

"  As  if  |  I  lov'd  |  my  litt  |  le  should  |  be  dieted." 

Coriol.  i.  9.  52. 
"Why,  so  |  didst  thou.  |  Come  they  |  of  no  |  Ue  family?" 

Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  129. 
"  That  ne  |  ver  may  |  ill  off  |  ice  or  |  k\\  jealousy." 

Ib.  v.  2.  491. 

"  That  he  |  suspects  |  none ;  on  |  whose  fool  |  ish  hdnesty." 

Lear,  i.  2.  197. 

"  Within  |  my  tent  |  his  bones  |  to-night  |  shall  lie 
Most  like  |  a  sold  |  ier,  ord  |  er'd  hdn  \  (ott)rably." 

J.  C.  v.  5.  79. 
Compare 

"Youngman,  |  thoucould'st  |  notdie  |  more/Ww  |  (oii}rable." 

Ib.  v.  i.  60. 

If  "  ily  "  were  fully  pronounced  in  both  cases,  the  repetition  would 
be  intolerable  in  the  following  : — 


PROSOD  Y.  339 

"  Cor.  But  what  |  is  like  |  me  for  |  merly".  | 

Men.  That's  wSrtJiily." — Coriol.  iv.  I.  53. 

"The  reg  |  ion  6f  |  my  heart  :  |  be  Kent  |  unmannerly." 

Lear,  i.  I.  147. 
"Look,    where  |  he    comes  !    |    Not    p6p  |  py    nor  |  man- 

drdgora" — Othello,  iii.  3.  330. 
"  A's  you  |  are  old  |  and  reverend,  \  you  should  |  be  wise." 

Lear,  i.  4.  261. 
"To  call  |  for  recompense:  \  appear  |  it  to  |  your  mind." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  8. 
"Is  not  |  so  1st  I  imable,  prof  I  itab  I  le  neither." 

M.  of  V.  i.  3.  167. 
"Age  is  |  un-ntc  \  essary ;    6n  |  my  knees  |  I  beg.'' 

Lear,  ii.  4.  157. 
"  Our  must  |  y  sii  \  perfliiity.  \  See  our  |  best  elders." 

Coriol.  i.  I.  230. 

459.  The    Spelling   (which  in  Elizabethan  writers   was   more 
influenced  by  the  pronunciation,  and  less  by  the  original  form  and 
derivation  of  the  word,  than  is  now  the  case)  frequently  indicates 
that  many  syllables  which  we  now  pronounce  were  then  omitted  in 
pronunciation. 

460.  Prefixes  are  dropped  in  the  following  words  :— 

'bolden'dhr  "embolden'd."— Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  55. 
'bovefor  "above."— Macbeth,  iii.  5.  31. 
'boutior  "about." — Temp.  i.  2.  220. 
'braid  for  "upbraid." — P.  of  T.\.  I.  93. 
W/for  "recall."— B.  and  F. 
'came  for  "  became. " — Sonn.  139. 
'cause  for  "because." — Macbeth,  iii.  6.  21. 
'ferns  for  "concerns." 

"What  'cerns  it  you."—  T.  of  Sh.  v.  i.  77. 
'ade  for  "decide." — Sonn.  46. 
'fitat  for  "  recital." 

"  He  made  a  blushing  'dial  of  himself. " — I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2. 62. 
'collective  " recollect. "— B.  J.  Alch.  i.  i. 
'come  for  "become." 

"  Will  you  not  dance  ? 

How  'come  you  thus  estranged  ?" — L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  213. 
r  "encouraging." — ASCH.  17. 
Z  2 


340  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

'count  for  "account." 

"  Why  to  a  public  'count  I  might  not  go." 

Hamlet,  iv.  7.  17. 

'  dear' d  for  "endear'd."— A.  and  C.  \.  4.  4. 
'fall for  "befall."— Ib.  iii.  7.  40.      So  in  O.  E. 
'friend Tor  "befriend."— ^«.  K  iv.  5.  17. 
'gain-giving  for  " against-giving,"  like  our  "misgiving." — 

Hamlet,  v.  2.  226. 

'gave  for  "misgave." — Coriol.  iv.  5.  157  (perhaps). 
So  "  My  minde  'gives  me  that  all  is  not  well "  (Nares).     But  the 
dropping  of  this  essential  prefix  seems  doubtful.      "Gave  "would 
make  sense,  though  not  such  good  sense.     In 

"  Then  say  |  if  they  [  be  true.  |  This  (mis-)sha  |  pen  knave," 

Temp.  v.  I.  268. 

Walker  with  great  probability  conjectures  "  mis-shap'd."   In 
"  Told  thee  no  lies,  made  thee  no  mistakings,  serv'd," 

Temp.  i.  2.  248. 

it  is  more  probable  that  the  second  "  thee,"  not  mis-,  is  slurred. 
'get  for  "beget." — Othello,  i.  3.  191. 
'gree  for  "agree."— M.  of  V.  ii.  2.  108  ;  T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  4. 

183 ;  A.  and  C.  ii.  6.  38. 
'haviourfor  "behaviour." — Hamlet,  i.  2.  81. 
'joy  for  "enjoy."— 2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  365. 
'larum  for  "  alarum." 

"  Then  shall  we  hear  their  'larum  and  they  ours." 

Coriol.  i.  4.  9. 
Folio,  "  their  Larum. " 

'lasior  "alas."—  Othello,  v.  I.  111. 

'latfdfor  "belated." — A.  and  C.  iii.  II.  3. 

'/few  for  "unless."— B.  J.  Sad  Sh.  iii.  i. 

'longs  for  "belongs." — Per.  ii.  Gow.  40. 

'longing  for  "  belonging.  "—/fc«.    VIII.   i.   2.  32  ;    W.    T. 

iii.  2.  104  ;  Hen.  V.  ii.  4.  80. 
'miss  for  "amiss." — V.  and  A. 
'mong  (pronounced)  for  "among." 

"Be  bright  |  and  jov  |  ial  amdng  \  your  guests  |  to-night." 

Macbeth,  iii.  2.  28. 
"  Cel.  That  lived  |  amongst  mtn.  \ 

Oliv.  And  well  |  he  might  |  do  so." 

A.  Y.  L.  iv.  3.  124. 


PROSODY.  341 

'nigkted  for  "benighted." — Lear,  iv.  5.  13. 
'nointed tor  "  anointed."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  813. 
'tuyafiftfctt  "annoyance." — Hamlet,  iii.  3.  13. 
'pairs  for  "  impairs."— B.  E.  91.     So  in  O.  E. 
'pale*  for  "impale,"  "surround." 

"And  will  you  'pale  your  head  in  Henry's  glory, 

And  rob  his  temples  of  the  diadem." — 3  Hen.  VI.  i.  4. 103. 
'pareltor  "apparel." — Lear,  iv.  I.  51. 
'plain  for  "complain."     (Fr.  plaindre. ) 
"The  king  hath  cause  to  plain." 

Lear,  iii.  i.  39  ;  Rich.  II.  i.  3.  175. 
'  rag' d  tor  "enraged." — Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  70. 
'ray  for  " array."— B.  T.  Sad  Sh.  ii.  "  Battel  ray." 

N.  P.  180.     O.  E. 

'rested  tor  "arrested." — C.  of  E.  iv.  2.  42.  Dromio  uses  which- 
ever form  suits  the  metre  best. 

"  I  know  |  not  at  I  whose  suit  |  he  is  |  arres  \  ted  well  ; 
But  he's  |  in  a  suit  |  of  buff  |  which  rested  \  him,  that  can  I 

I  tell."— C  ofE.  iv.  2.  43. 
So  should  be  read 

"King.  Or  yield  up  Aquitaine. 
Princess.  We  (armrest  your  word." 

L.  L.  L.  ii.  i.  160. 

It  has  been  objected  that  'rested  is  a  vulgarism  only  fit  for  a  Dromio. 
But  this  is  not  the  case.  It  is  used  by  the  master  Antipholus  E.  (C. 
of  E.  iv.  4.  3). 

' say' d tor  "assay'd."— Per.  i.  i.  59.  Comp.  B.  J.  Cy.'sRev.  iv.  i. 
'scape  for  "  escape  "  freq. 

'scusetor  "excuse."—  Othello,  iv.  i.  80;  M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  444. 
'stall  'd  apparently  for  "forestalled." — B.  J.  Sejan.  iii.  I;  for 

"install'd."— Rich.  HI.  i.  3.  206. 
'stonish'dtor  "  astonish'd." 

"  Or'stonish'da.s  night-wanderers  often  are." —  V.andA.^i^. 
' stray' d  tor  "destroy'd." 

"'Stroy'd  in  dishonour." — A.  and  C.  iii.  1 1.  54. 
'tend tor  "attend."— Hamlet,  iv.  3.  47. 
''turn  for  "return; "  'lotted  for  " allotted. " 
unsistingtor  "unresisting"  (explained  in  the  Globe  Glossary 

as  "unresting"). 
*  " Did  I  impale  him  with  the  regal  crown?"— 3  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  189. 


342  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  That  wounds  the  unsisting  postern  with  these  blows." 

M.for  M.  iv.  2.  92. 
This  explains  how  we  must  scan 

"Prevent  |  it,  resist  ('stst)  \  it,  let-|  it  not  |  be  so." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  i.  148. 
"A   sooth  |  sayer  bids  |  you  beware   ('ware)  \  the   ides  |  of 

March."— J.  C.  i.  2.  19. 
"  Environ 'd  ('viron'd)  \  me  about  |  and  how  |  led  in  |  mine 

ears."— Rich.  III.  i.  4-  59. 
"At    an  |  y    time  |   have    recourse    (?  course)  \  unto  |   the 

princes."— Ib.  iii.  5.  109. 

"Lest  I'  I  revenge   Avenge) — what?   I  Myself  I  upon  I  my- 
self?"-/^, v.  3.  185. 

The  apostrophe,  which  has  been  inserted  above  in  all  cases,  is 
only  occasionally,  and  perhaps  somewhat  at  random,  inserted  in  the 
Folio.  It  is  therefore  not  always  possible  to  tell  when  a  verb  is 
shortened,  as  "comes"  for  "becomes,"  or  when  a  verb  may, 
perhaps,  be  invented.  For  instance,  "dear'd"  maybe  a  verbal  form 
of  the  adjective  "dear,"  or  a  contraction  of  the  verb  "endear'd." 
"  Conies  (becomes)  dear'd  (endear'd)  by  being  lack'd." 

A.  and  C.  i.  4.  44. 

Sometimes,  perhaps,  the  prefix,  though  written,  ought  scarcely  to 
be  pronounced  : 

"  How  fares  |  the  king  |  and  's  follow  |  ers?  (Con)  |  fined  | 

together." — Temp.  v.  I.  7. 
"O  (de)spiteful  love  !  unconstant  womankind," 

T.  of  Sh.  iv.  2.  14. 
unless  the  "O"  stands  by  itself.     (See  512.) 

"(Be)longing  |  to  a  man.  |  O  be  |  some  6th  |  er  man." 

R.  andj.  ii.  2.  42. 

461.  Other  Contractions  are: 

BarthoFmew  (T.  of  Sh.  Ind.  i.  105)  ;  Ha'rford  for  "  Haverford  " 
(Rich.  III.  iv.  5.  7);  difple  for  "disciple"  (B.  J.  Fox,  iv.  i;  so 
SPENSER,  F.  Q.  i.  10.  27);  ignomy  for  "ignominy"  (M.  for  M.  ii. 
4.  Ill,  I  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  100  [Fol.] ;  genman  (UDALL)  ;  gentleman 
(Ham.  [1603]  i.  5) ;  gent  (SPENSER)  freq.  for  "gentle"  (so  in  O.  E.); 
easly  (CHAPMAN,  Odyss.)  for  "easily;"  par'lous  for  "perilous" 
(Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  35) ;  inter 'gatories  for  "interrogatories"  (M.  ofV. 
v.  i.  298);  camtick  for  "candlestick,"— 


PROSODY.  343 

"  I  had  rather  hear  a  brazen  canstick  turned." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  i.  131. 

Marie  (B.  J.  E.  out  S*c.  v.  4)  for  "  marvel ;"  ivhe'er  for  "  whether  " 
(O.  E.) ;  and  the  familiar  contraction  good-bye,  "  God  be  with  you," 
which  enables  us  to  scan  Macbeth,  iii.  I.  44.  We  also  find  in's  for 
"  in  his  ;"  tKivert  for  "thou  wert ;"  you1  re  for  "you  were;  "  tiwere 
for  "he  were."  So  "she  were"  is  contracted  in  pronunciation  : 

"'Twere   good  |  she  were  spo  |  ken   with:  ]   for   she  |  may 
strew." — Hamlet,  iv.  5-14. 

Y'are  for  "you  are  ;"  this1  for  "  this  is  :" 

"  O  this1*  the  poison  of  deep  grief ;  it  springs 

All  from  her  father's  death.  — Hamlet,  iv.  5.  76. 
"  Thtt  a  |  good  block."— Lear,  iv.  6.  187. 
So  we  ought  to  scan 

"  Lear.    This  is  a  \  dull  sight.  |  Are  you  |  not  Kent?  | 

Kent:  The  same."— Lear,  v.  3.  282. 

"Sir,  this  is  \  the  gent  |  leman  |  I  told  |  you  of." 

T.  ofSh.  iv.  4.  20. 

"  Sir,  this  is  |  the  house.  |      Please  it  I  you  that  I  I  call?" 

Ib.  1. 

This,  for  "  this  is,"  is  also  found  in  M.forM.  v.  1. 131  (Fol.  this  'a) ; 
Temp.  iv.  i.  143  ;  T.  of  Sh.  i.  2.  45.  Many  other  passages,  such  as 
T.  G.ofV.  v.  4.  93,  M.forM.  iv.  2.  103,  T.  of  Sh.  iii.  2.  1,  re- 
quire is  to  be  dropped  in  reading.  This  contraction  in  reading  is 
common  in  other  Elizabethan  authors ;  it  is  at  all  events  as  early 
as  Chaucer,  Knighte's  Tale,  233. 

Shall  is  abbreviated  into  V  and  V  in  Lear,  iv.  6.  246  ;  R.  and  J. 
i.  3.  9.  In  the  first  of  these  cases  it  is  a  provincialism,  in  the 
second  a  colloquialism.  A  similar  abbreviation  "I'st,"  for  "I 
will,"  "thou'st"  for  "  thou  wilt,"  "  thou  shalt,"  &c.,  seems  to 
have  been  common  in  the  early  Lincolnshire  dialect  (Gill,  quoted  by 
Mr.  Ellis).  Even  where  not  abbreviated  visibly,  it  seems  to  have 
been  sometimes  audibly,  as, 

"  If  that  |  be  true  |  I  shall  see  I  my  boy  I  again." 

K.  J.  iii.  4.  78. 

"  I  shall  give  |  worse  pay  |  ment." — T.  N.  iv.  i.  21. 

"  He  is,  |  Sir  John  :  |  I  fear  |  we  shall  stay  |  too  16ng." 

i  Hen.  IV.  iv.  2.  83. 

*  Globe,  "this  is." 


344  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

With  seems  often  to  have  been  pronounced  wi\  and  hence 
combined  with  other  words.  We  have  "w'us,"  (B.  and  F. 
Elder  Brother,  v.  i)  for  "with  us,"  and  "take  me  w1  ye"  (ib.)  for 
"with  ye." 

Beside  the  well-known  "doff"  "do-off,"  and  "don"  "do-on," 
we  also  find  "dout"  for  "do-out"  (Hamlet,  iv.  7.  192) ;  "probal" 
for  "probable"  (Othello,  ii.  3.  344). 

WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION. 

462.  Sometimes  the  spelling  does  not  indicate  the  contracted 
pronunciation.  For  instance,  we  spell  nation  as  though  it  had  three 
syllables,  but  pronounce  it  as  though  it  had  two.  In  such  cases  it 
is  impossible  to  determine  whether  two  syllables  coalesce  or  are 
rapidly  pronounced  together.  But  the  metre  indicates  that  one  of 
these  two  processes  takes  place. 

Syllables  ending  in  vowels  are  also  frequently  elided  before  vowels 
in  reading,  though  not  in  writing.  Thus  : 

"  Prosp.  Against  |  what  should  |  ensue.  | 
Mir.  How  came  |  we  ashore  ?  " 

Temp.  i.  2.  158. 

"  You  give  I  your  wife  I  too  unkind  j  a  cause  I  of  grief." 

M.ofV.v.  I.  175. 
"No  (i)mped  |  iment  |  between,  |  but  that  |  you  must." 

Coriol.  ii.  3.  236. 
"  There  was  |  a  yield  |  ing  ;  this  |  admits  |  no  (e)xcuse." 

Ib.  v.  6.  69. 
Here  even  the  Folio  reads  "  excuse." 

"  It  is  |  too  hard  |  a  knot  |  for  me  |  to  untie." 

T.  N.  ii.  2.  42. 

The  is  often  elided  before  a  vowel,  and  therefore  we  may  either 
pronounce  this  is,  this'  (461),  or  write  th'  for  the,  in 

"  O  worthy  Goth,  this  is  the  incarnate  devil."—  T.  A.  v.  I.  40. 
Remembering  that   "one"  was  pronounced  without  its  present 
initial  sound  of  w,  we  shall  easily  scan  (though  "the"  is  not  elided 
in  many  modern  texts) — 

"  TK  one  sweet  |  ly  flatt  |  ers,  //fc'oth  |  er  fear  j  eth  harm." 

R.  of  L.  172. 
"  One  half  |  of  me  |  is  yours,  |  th'  dther  |  half  yours." 

M.  of  V.  in.  2.  16. 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    345 

"Ransom  |  ing    him    (217)  |  or     pity  |  ing,     threate  |  ning 
ttt  other."—  Coriol.  i.  6.  36. 

And  this  explains 

"  And  of  |  his  old  |  exper(i)  (467)  |  enceM(^)6n  |  ly  darling." 

A.  W.  ii.  i.  110. 
"  Has  shook  |  and  trem  |  bled  at  |  the  ill  neigh  |  bourhood." 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  154. 
"Where  should  |  thismu  |  sic  be?  |  f  thedir,  \  or  the  earth?" 

Temp.  i.  2.  387,  389. 
(Folio  "  i'  th'  air,  or  th'  earth.") 

463.  R  frequently  softens    or    destroys  a  following 

VOWel  (the  vowel  being  nearly  lost  in  the  burr  which  follows  the 
effort  to  pronounce  the  r). 

"  When  the  |  aldrum  \  were  struck  |  than  i  |  dly  sit" 

Cor.  iu  2.  80. 


Ham.  Perchance 
Hor.     I  wdrrant 


t'will  walk  |  again. 

it  will." — Hamlet,  L  2.  3. 


"  I'  have  |  cast  off  |  for  ever;  |  thou  shalt,  |  I  wdrrant  thee." 

Lear,  i.  4.  332. 

"  I  bet  I  ter  brook  I  than  flourish  \  ing  peo  I  pled  towns." 

T.  G.  of  V.  v.  4.  3. 
"  Whiles  I  |  in  Ire  |  land  nourish*  \  a  might  |  y  band." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  348. 
"  Place  bdrrels  \  of  pitch  |  upon  |  the  fat  |  al  stake." 

I  Hen.  VI.  v.  4.  57. 
"  Tis  mdrle  \  he  stabb'  |  d  you  not." 

B.  J.  E.  out  6°<r.  v.  4 ;  Rich.  III.  i.  4.  64. 
"  A  barren  \  detest  |  ed  vale  |  you  see  |  it  is." 

T.  A.  ii.  3.  92  ;  2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  4.  3. 
So  "quarrel,"  Rich.  III.  i.  4.  209. 

This  is  very  common  with  "spirit,"  which  softens  the  following 
/',  or  sometimes  the  preceding  /,  in  either  case  becoming  a  mono- 
syllable. 

"And  then,  |  they  say,  |  no  spirit  \  dares  stir  |  abroad." 

Hamlet,  i.  I.  161. 
So  scan 

"  How  now,  |  spirit,  whither  |  wander  |  you?"— M. N.D.  ii.  i.l. 
("  Whither"  is  a  monosyllable.  See  466.) 

*  Compare  nourrice,  nurse. 


346  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

This  curtailment  is  expressed  in  the   modem    "sprite."      So   in 
Lancashire,  "  brid  "  for  "  bird."     Hence  we  can  scan 
"  In  aid  I  whereof,  I  we  of  I  the  spirit  \  ualty." 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  132. 
Instances  might  be  multiplied. 

464.  R  often  softens  a  preceding  unaccented  vowel. 

This  explains  the  apparent  Alexandrine 

"  He  thinks  |  me  now  |  incap  |  able ;  |  confederates." 

Temp.  i.  2.  Ill,  iv.  I.  140. 

465.  Er,  el,  and  le  final  dropped  or  softened,  especially  before 
vowels  and  silent  h.  *     The  syllable  er,  as  in  letter,  is  easily  inter- 
changeable with  re,   as  lettre.     In  O.  E.    "bettre"   is  found  for 
"better."     Thus  words  frequently  drop  or  soften  -er ;   and  in  like 
manner  -el  and  -le,  especially  before  a  vowel  or  h  in  the  next  word  : 

(1)  "  Report  |  should  rend  |  er  him  hour  |  ly  to  |  your  ear." 

Cymb.  iii.  4.  153. 
"  Into  |  a  good  |  ly  bulk.    |  Good  time  |  encounter  her." 

W.  T.  ii.  i.  20. 
•"  This  lett  |  er  he  ear  |  ly  bade  |  me  give  |  his  father." 

R.  and  J.  v.  3.  275. 
"  You'll  be  |  good  company,  |  my  sist  |  er  and  you." 

MlDDLETON,    Witch,  ii.  2. 

"  Than  e'er  |  the  mast  |  er  of  arts  |  or  giv  |  er  of  wit." 

B.  J.  Poetast. 

(2)  "  Traw/  you  |  far  on,  |  or  are  |  you  at  I  the  farthest?" 

T.  ofSh.  iv.  2.  73. 

(3)  "  That  made  |  great  Jove  |  to  humb  I  le  him  to  I  her  hand." 

Ib.  i.  i.  174. 
"  Gent/«?men  |  and  friends,  [  I  thank  |  you  for  |  your  pains." 

Ib.  iii.  2.  186. 
"  I7  am  |  a  gent&  |  man  of  |  a  com  |  pany." 

Hen.   V.\v.  i.  39,  42. 

"Needle,"  which  in  Gammer  Gurton  rhymes  with  "feele,"is 
often  pronounced  as  a  monosyllable. 

"  Deep  clerks  she  dumbs,  and  with  her  needA?  (Folio)  composes. " 
P.  of  T.  v.  Gower,  5;  Cymb.  i.  I.  168. 

•  The  same  tendency  is  still  more  noticeable  in  E.  E.      See  Essay  on  the 
Metres  of  Chaucer,  by  the  Rev.  W.  W.  Skeat  (Aldine  Series). 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    347 

"  Or  when  she  would  with  sharp  need/<?  (Folio)  wound 
The  cambric  which  she  made  more  sound 
By  hurting  it" — P.  of  T.  iv.  Gower,  23. 

In  the  latter  passage  "  needle  wound  "  is  certainly  harsh,  though 
Gower  does  bespeak  allowance  for  his  verse.  Mr.  A.  J.  Ellis 
suggests  '"Id"  for  "  would,"  which  removes  the  harshness. 

"  And  grip  |  ing  it  |  the  need/*?  |  his  fing  |  er  pricks." 

A',  of  L.  319. 
"  Their  need&r  |  to  Ian  |  ces,  and  |  their  gent  |  le  hearts." 

K.  J.  v.  2.  157. 

"To  thread  |  the  post  |  era  of  |  a  small  |  need/t-'-r  eye." 

Rich.  II.  v.  5.  17. 

"  Needle's  "  seems  harsh,  and  it  would  be  more  pleasing  to  modern 
ears  to  scan  "  the  post  |  ern  of  a  |  small  nee  |  die's  eye."  But  this 
verse  in  conjunction  with  P.  of  T.  iv.  Gower,  23,  may  indicate  that 
"needle"  was  pronounced  as  it  was  sometimes  written,  very  much 
like  "  neeld,"  and  the  d  in  "  neeld  "  as  in  "  vild  "  (vile)  may  have 
been  scarcely  perceptible. 

"  A  samp/^  |  to  the  young  |  est,  to  |  the  more  |  mature." 

Cymb.  i.  I.  48. 
"  The  comm  |  on  peop&  |  by  numb  |  ers  swarm  |  to  us." 

3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  2.  2 ;  T.  A.  i.  I.  20. 
And,  even  in  the  Sonnets : 

"  And  trouble  \  deaf  heav  |  en  with  |  my  boot  |  less  cries." 

Sonn.  29. 
"  Unc/<?  Mar  |  cus,  since  |  it  is  |  my  fa  |  trier's  mind." 

T.  A.  v.  3.  1. 

"  Duke  F.  And  get  |  you  from  |  our  court.  | 
A\'s.  Me,  nnde?  \ 

Duke  F.  You,  cousin  ?  " 

A.  Y.  L.  i.  3.  44. 
466.  Whether  and  ever  are  irequently  written  or  pronounced 

whe'r  or  where  and  e'er.     The  th  is  also  softened  in  either, 
hither,  other,  father,  &c.,  and  the  v  in  having,  evil,  &c. 

It  is  impossible  to  tell  in  many  of  these  cases  what  degree  of 
"  softening"  takes  place.  In  "other,"  for  instance,  the  ///  is  so 
completely  dropped  that  it  has  become  our  ordinary  "or,"  which 
we  use  without  thought  of  contraction.  So  "whether"  is  often 
written  "wh'er"  in  Shakespeare.  Some,  but  it  is  impossible  to  say 
what,  degree  of  "softening,"  though  not  expressed  in  writing, 
seems  to  have  affected  th  in  the  following  words : — 


348  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Brother. 

"  But  for  I  our  trust  |  y  brdther  \  -in-law,  |  the  abbot." 

Rich.  II.  v.  3.  137. 

Either. 

"Either  led  |  or  driv  |  en  as  |  we  point  |  the  way." 

y.  C.  iv.  i.  23 ;  Rich.  HI.  i.  2.  64,  iv.  4.  82. 
"Are  hired  |  to  bear  |  their  staves;  |  ett/ierthou,  \  Macbeth." 
Macbeth,  v.  7.  18;  M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  32. 

Further. 

"As  if  |  thou  never  (nt'er)  \  walk'dst  further  \  than  Fins  |  bury." 

I  Hen.  IV.  in.  i.  257. 

Hither. 

"'Tishe  |  that  sent  us  ('s)  |  hither  novr  \  toslaught  |  erthee." 

Rich.  III.  i.  4.  250. 

So  the  Quartos.  The  Folio,  which  I  have  usually  followed  in 
other  plays,  differs  greatly  from  the  Quartos  in  Rich.  III.  Its 
alterations  generally  tend  to  the  removal  of  seeming  difficulties. 

Neither. 

"  Neither  have  |  I  mon  |  ey  nor  |  commod  |  ity." 

M.  of  V.  i.  i.  178. 

Rather. 

"  Rdther  than  |  have  made  j  that  sav  |  age  duke  |  thine  heir." 
3  Hen,  VI.  i.  1 . 224.   So  Othello,  iii.  4.  25 ;  Rich.  II.  iv.  1.16. 

Thither. 

"  Thither  g6  |  these  news  |  as  fast  |  as  horse  |  can  carry  'em." 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  78. 

Whether. 

"Good  sir,  |  say  -whether  \  you'll  ans  |  wer  me  |  or  no." 

C.  of  E.  iv.  i.  60. 
Perhaps    "Which    he  |  deserves  |  to    lose.)    Whether    he    was 

(h'  was:   461)  |  combined." — Macbeth,  i.  3.  111. 
"But  see,  |  -whether  Brut  |  us  be  |  alive  |  or  dead." 

y.  C.  v.  4.  30  ;  Rich.  III.  iv.  2.  120. 
"A  heart  |  y  welcome.  |  Whether thou  |  beest  he  |  or  no." 

Tempest,  v.  i.  111. 

Whither, 

"  What  means  |  he  now?  |   Go  ask  |  him  whither  \  he  goes." 

I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  3.  28. 
"  Glouc.  The  king  |  is  in  |  high  rage.  | 

"  Com.  Whither  is  |  he  going  ?  "—Lear,  ii.  4.  299. 

So  scan 

"How  now,  |  spirit  !  U'hither  \  wander  !  you?" 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  1. 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    349 

This  perhaps  explains  : 

"To  find  I  the   (462)  other  forth,  |  and   by  |  advent  |  uring 

both."— M. 
But  see  501. 

Having. 

"How  could  |  he  see  |  to  do  |  them?  Having  \  made  one." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  124. 
"  Having  lost  |  the  fair  |  discov  |  ery  of  |  her  way." 

V.  and  A.  828. 

"  Our  gran  |  dam  earth  |  having  this  |  distemp  |  erature." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  I.  34. 

So  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  235  ;  T.  of  A.  v.  I.  61  ;  A.  W.  v.  3.  123 ; 
Cymb.  v.  3.  45. 

In  all  of  these  verses  it  may  seem  difficult  for  modern  readers  to 
understand  how  the  v  could  be  dropped.  But  it  presents  no  more 
difficulty  than  the  v  in  "ever,"  "  over." 

Evil. 

It  is  also  dropped  in  "evil"  and  "devil"  (Scotch  "de'il"). 

"  The  eVils  |  she  hatch'd  |  were  not  |  effect  |  ed,  so." 

Cymb.  v.  5.  60. 
"  Of  horr  |  id  hell  |  can  come  |  a  dez/il  |  more  damn'd." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  56. 
"Ez/il-eyed  |  unto  |  you  ;  y'  are  (461)  |  my  prison  |  er,  but." 

Cymb.  i.  I.  72. 

So  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  76.  Of  course,  therefore,  the  following  is  not 
an  Alexandrine  : 

"Reproach  |  and  diss  |  olii  I  tion  hang  |  eth  6z/er  him." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  258. 

Similarly  the  d  is  dropped  in  "mju/am,"  which  is  often  pro- 
nounced "  ma'am,"  a  monosyllable. 

The  v  is  of  course  still  dropped  in  hast  for  havest,  has  for  haveth 
or  haves.  In  the  Folio,  has  is  often  written  tia's,  and  an  omission 
in  other  verbs  is  similarly  expressed,  as  "sit's"  for  "sitteth" 
(K.  J.  ii.  I.  289). 

467.  I  in  the  middle  of  a  trisyllable,  if  unaccented,  is 

frequently  dropped,  or  so  nearly  dropped  as  to  make  it  a  favourite 
syllable  in  trisyllabic  feet. 

(i)     "Judi  |  cious  punish  \  ment!     'Twas  |  this  flesh  (  begot." 
Lear,  iii.  4.  76;  M.for  M.  i.  3.  39. 


350  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Our    rev  |  (e)rend    cdrdi  \  nal  carried.    |     Like  it,  |  your 

grdce."— Hen.  VIII.  i.  I.  100,  102,  105,  &c. 
"With  whom  I  the  Kent  I  ishmen  |  will  -will  \  ingly  rise." 

3  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  41. 
"  Which  are  |  the  mov  |  ers  of  |  a  Idnguish  \  ing  death." 

Cymb.  i.  5.  9. 
"My  thought  I  whose  miir  I  der  yet  I  is  but  \fantdstical." 

Macbeth,  i.  3.  139. 
"  That  lov'd  |  your  father:  |  the  rest  \  due  of  |  your  fortune.". 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  196. 
"  Premising  \  to  bring  |  it  to  |  the  Por  |  pentine." 

C.  ofE.  v.  i.  222. 
So  I  Hen.  VI.  iv.  I.  166. 

(2}  Very  frequently  before  ly: 

"  The  mea  |  sure  then  |  of  one  |  is  east  \  ly  told." 

L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  190. 
"  His  short  |  thick  neck  |  cannot  |  be  eds  \  ily  harmed." 

V.  and  A.  627. 
"Prettily  \  methought  |  did  play  |  the  or  |  ator." 

i  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  175. 
(3)  And  before  ty : 

"  Such  bold  |  hosttii  \  ty,  teach  |  ing  his('s)  du  |  teous  land." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  44. 
"  Of  god-  |  like  dmi  \  ty,  which  |  appears  I  most  strongly." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  4.  3. 
"  A  riel  I  and  411  |  his  qudli  \  ty. 

" Prosp.  Hast  |  thou,  spirit?" — Tempest,  i.  2.  193. 

"Of  smooth  |  civili  \  ty  yet  |  am  I  in  |  land  bred." 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  96. 
Compare  BUTLER,  Hudibras,  part  ii.  cant.  3.  945  : 

"Which  in  |  their  dark  \fatdl  \  'ties  lurk  |  ing 
At  des  |  tin'd  per  |  iods  fall  |  a-work  |  ing." 

This  explains  the  apparent  Alexandrines : 

"  Thou  wilt  |  prove  his.  |  Take  him  [  to  pri  |  son,  6fficer." 

M.  for  M.  iii.  2.  32. 
"  Some  tricks  |  of  des  |  perat  |  ion,  all  |  but  mariners" 

Temp.  i.  I.  211. 
"One  dowle  |  that's  in  |  my  plume,  |  my  fell  |  ow  ministers." 

Temp.  iii.  2.  65,  v.  I.  28  ;  M.for  M.  iv.  5.  6  ;  Macb.  i.  5.  49. 
"  This  is  |  the  gent  |  leman  |  I  told  |  your  ladyship.'" 

T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  4.  87. 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    351 

"  A  virt  |  uous  gent  |  lewom  |  an,   mild  |  and  bcaiiti/ul" 

T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  4.  184. 

"  And  te  |  d/busness  |  the  limbs  |  and  out  |  wardyfcfomfor." 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  91. 

Sometimes    these    contractions    are    expressed    in    writing,    as 
"par'lous,"  Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  35.     This  is  always  a  colloquial  form. 

468.  Any  unaccented  syllable  of  a  polysyllable  (whether 

containing  /  or  any  other  vowel)  may  sometimes  be  softened  and 
almost  ignored.     Thus — 

a       "  Hold    thee,  |  from    this,  |  for   ever.   |    The   barb  |  arous 

Scy"thian."— Lear,  i.  i.  118. 
"  Say  by  |  this  to  |  ken  I'  |  desire  |  his  company." 

M.forM.  iv.  3.  144. 
ed     '-'With    them   |   they    think  |  on.       Things  |  without  |  all 

renrnty." — Macbeth,  iii.  2.  11. 
"Men.  You  must  |  return  |  and  mend  |  it. 
Sen.  There's  |  no  remedy." 

Coriol.  iii.  2.  26  ;  T.  N.  iii.  4.  367. 
em    "  All  bro  |  ken  imple  \  wents  of  |  a  rii  |  ined  h6use." 

T.  of  A.  iv.  2.  16. 

"  Join'd  with  |  an  enmiy  |  proclaim'd  ;  |  and  from  |  his  coffers." 
Hen.  V.  ii.  2.  168;  M.forM.  ii.  2.  180;  Macb.  iii.  i.  105. 
tn      "  The  mess  |  ^»gers  from  |  our  sis  |  ter  and  |  the  king." 

Lear,  ii.  2.  54. 
'"Tis  done  |  alrea  |  dy,  and  |  the  mess  |  etiger  gone." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  6.  31  ;  A.  W.  iii.  2.  111. 

Passenger  is  similarly  used. 

er      "In    our  |  last    conference,  |  pass'd    in  |  proba  |  tion    with 

you." — Macbeth,  iii.  I.  80. 
fs      "This  is  |  his  maj  |  £rty,  say  |  your  mind  |  to  him." 

A.  W.  ii.  i.  98. 
"I  that  |  am  rude  |  ly stamped,  |  and  want  |  love's  maj<?jty." 

Rich.  III.  i.  i.  16. 

Majesty  is  a  quasi-dissyllable  in  Rich.  III.  i.  3.  1,  19,  ii.  I.  75  ; 
Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  141, 147,  iii.  2.  113,  v.  2.  97,  3.  35 ;  Macbeth, 
iii.  4.  2,  121. 

ess     "Our  pur  I  pose  nee  I  <?jjary  and  I  not  en  I  vious." 

y.  C.  ii.  i.  178. 

/       "Let  us  |  be  sacr//fr  |  ers  and  I  not  but  |  chers,  Caius." 

Ib.  ii.  i.  166. 


352  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

o       "The  inn  j  ocent  milk  |  in  it  |  most  inn  |  0cent  mouth." 

W.  T.  iil  2.  101. 
"  There  take  I  an  m  |  vent^if  [  of  all  |  I  have." 

Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  452. 
ua     "Go  thou  |  to  sanctwa  |  ry  [sanctu'ry  or  sanct'ry],  and  |  good 

thoughts  |  possess  thee." — Rich.  III.  iv.  I.  94. 
"Shall  fry  |  outof(457a)  |  itself;  |  nor  sleep  |  nor  sanctuary." 

Coriol.  i.  10.  19. 

"  Some  read  |  Alvar  |  ez'  Helps  |  to  Grace, 
Some  Sanctwa  |  ry  6f  |  a  troub  |  led  soul." 

COLVIL'S  Whig  Supplication,  i.  1186  (Walker). 
u       "When  liv  |  ing  light  |  should  kiss  |  it ;  'tis  |  unnatwral." 

Macbeth,  ii.  4.  10;  Hen.  V.  iv.  2.  13. 
"Thoughts  spec«  |  lative  |  their  un  |  sure  hopes  |  relate." 

Macbeth,  v.  4.  19. 
"And  ne  |  ver  live  |  to  show  j  the  incredw  |  lous  world." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  5.  153. 

"How  you  |  were  borne  |  in  hand,  |  how  cross'd,  |  the  in- 
struments."— Macbeth,  iii.  I.  81,  iv.  3.  239. 

469.  Hence  polysyllabic  names  often  receive  but  one 
accent  at  the  end  of  the  line  in  pronunciation, 

Proper  names,  not  conveying,  as  other  nouns  do,  the  origin  and 
reason  of  their  formation,  are  of  course  peculiarly  liable  to  be 
modified ;  and  this  modification  will  generally  shorten  rather  than 
lengthen  the  name. 

"  To  your  |  own  con  |  science,  sir,  |  before  |  Polixenes." 

W.  T.  iii.  2.  47. 

"  That  ere  |  the  sun  |  shone  bright  |  on.     O'f  |  Hermione." 

Ib.  v.  I.  95. 
"  The  rar  |  est  of  |  all  wo  |  men.     Go,  |  CleSmenes." 

Ib.  112. 
"  To  our  |  most  fair  |  and  prince  |  ly  cous  |  in  Katharine." 

Hen.  V.  v.  2.  4. 
"  My  broth  |  er  and  |  thy  un  |  cle,  called  |  AntSnio." 

Temp.  \.  2.  66. 
"My  lord  |  Bassan  |  io,  since  |  you  have  found  |  Antdnio" 

M.  of  V.  i.  i.  59  :  so  often  in  this  play. 
"  Then  all  |  a-fire  |  with  me  |  ;  the  king's  |  son  Ferdinand:1 

Temp.  i.  2.  212. 

"  I  rat  |  iff  [  this  my  |  rich  gift.  |  O  Ferdinand."— /^.iv.i.8. 
"  Then    par  |  don    me  |  my    wrongs.  |    But    how  I  should 
Pr6spero?"—Ib.  v.  I.  119. 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    353 

"  I'll  af  I  ter,  more  |  to  be  |  revenged  |  on  I? glamour." 

T.  G.  of  V.  v.  2.  51. 
"  What  it  |  contains.  |  I'f  you  |  shall  see  |  Cordelia." 

Lear,  iii.  I.  46. 
"  Upon  |  such  sacr  |  ific  |  es,  my  |  Cordelia." 

Ib.  v.  3.  20,  245. 
So  throughout  the  play. 

"  When  thou  |  liest  how  |  ling.    What !  |  the  fair  |  Ophtlia." 

Hamlet,  v.  i.  265. 
"At  Gre  |  cian  sword  |  contemn  |  ing.     Tell  |   Valeria." 

Coriol.  i.  3.  46. 

"  Here,  if  |  it  like  |  your  hon  |  our.     See  |  that  Cldudio." 
M.forM.  ii.  i.  33,  iii.  i.  48. 

"  So  then  |  you  hope  |  of  par  |  don  from  |  lord  A'ngelo  ?" 
Ib.  iii.  i.  1,  iv.  3.  147,  i.  4.  79. 
"  I  see  |  my  son  |  Antiph  |  olus  |  and  Drdmio." 

C.  ofE.  v.  i.  196. 
"  The  form  |  of  death.  |  Meantime  [  I  writ  |  to  Romeo." 

R.  and  J.  v.  3.  246. 
"  Looks  it  |  not  like  |  the  king?  |  Mark  it,  |  Hordtio." 

Hamlet,  i.  i.  43. 

"  They  love  |  and  dote  |  on  ;  call  |  him  bount  |  (e)ous  Biick- 
'ingham^—IIcn.  VIII.  ii.  I.  52;  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  508, 
ii.  2.  123. 

"  Vaux.  The  great  |  ness  of  [  his  per  |  son. 
Buck.  Nay,  |  Sit  Nicolas." 

Hen.  VIII.  ii.  i.  100. 
"  But  I'  |  beseech  |  you,  what's  |  become  |  of  Katharine?" 

Ib.  iv.  i.  22. 

"  Saw'st  thou  |  the  mel  |  anchol  |  y  Lord  |  Northumber- 
land?"—Rich.  III.  v.  3.  68. 

"  Therefore  |  present  |  to  her,  |  as  some  |  time  Margaret." 

Ib.  iv.  4.  274. 
"  And  you  |  our  no  |  less  16  v  |  ing  son  |  of  Albany" 

Lear,  i.  I.  43. 
"  Exasp  I  crates,  I  makes  mad  I  her  sis  I  ter  Gdneril" 

Ib.  v.  I.  60. 
"  As  fit  |  the  brid  |  al.     Beshrew  |  me  much,  |  Emilia." 

Othello,  iii.  4.  150. 
"  Is  come  |  from  Cae's  |  ar  ;  there  |  fore  hear  |  it,  Antony.'" 

A.  and  C.\.  \.  27,  i.  5.  21,  &c". 
"  Than  Cle  |  opatr  |  a,  nor  |  the  queen  j  of  Plolcniv." 

Ib.  i.  4.  6. 

A   A 


354  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  With    them,  |  the    two  |  brave    bears,  |  Warwick  |  and 

Mfatague"—!  Hen.  VI.  v.  7.  10. 
Less  frequently  in  the  middle  of  the  line  : 

"  My  lord  I  of  Buckingham,  \  if  my  |  weak  or  |  atory." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  37. 
"  Cousin  I  of  Buck  I  ingham  and  I  you  sage,  |  grave  men." 

Ib.  iii.  7.  217. 
"  Looking  I  for  A'ntony.  \   But  all  I  the  charms  I  of  love." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  I.  20. 
"Did  slay  |  this  Fortinbras ;  \  who,  by1  |  a  seal'd  |  compact 

(49o).»_ Hamlet,  i.  I.  86. 
"  Thrift    thrift,  I  Horatio,  \  the  fu  I  neral  I  bak'd  meats." 

Ib.  i.  2.  180. 

41  He  gave  |  to  Alexander;  \    to  PtSlem  \  y  he  j  assigned." 

Ib.  iii.  6.  15. 
"  Thou  art  I  Hermione ;  I  or  rath  I  er,  thou  I  art  she." 

W.  T.  v.  3.  25. 

"  To  soft  I  en  A'ngelo,  \  and  that's  |  my  pith  |  of  business." 

M.for  M.  i.  4.  70. 

Enobarbus  in  A.  and  C.  has  but  one  accent,  wherever  it  stands 
in  the  verse  : 

"  Bear  hate  |  ful  memo  |  ry,  poor  |  Enobdr  \  bus  did." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  9.  9,  &c. 

"Of  your  I  great  pre  |  decessor,  |  King  Edward  \  the  Third." 

Hen.   V.  i.  2.  248. 

It  may  here  be  remarked  that  great  licence  is  taken  with  the 
metre  wherever  a  list  of  names  occurs  : 

"  That  Harry  duke  of  Hereford,  Rainold  lord  Cobham, 
Sir  Thomas  Erpinghnm,  Sir  John  Ramston, 
Sir  John  Norbery,  Sir  Robert  Waterton,  and  Francis  Quoint." 
Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  279,  283,  284. 

"  The  spirits 
Of  valiant  Shirley,  Stafford,  Blunt,  are  in  my  arms." 

i  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  4. 

"  Whither  away,  Sir  John  Falstaffe,  in  such  haste?" 

I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  104. 

"  John  duke  of  Norfolk,  Walter  Lord  Ferrers." 

Rich.  III.  v.  5.  13. 

"  Lord  Cromwell  of  Wingfield,  Lord  Furnival  of  Sheffield." 

Ib.  iv.  7.  166. 
"  Sir  Gilbert  Talbot,  Sir  William  Stanley."— 74.  iv.  5.  10. 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    355 

In  the  last  examples,  and  in  some  others,  the  pause  between  two 
names  seems  to  license  either  the  insertion  or  omission  of  a  syllable. 

470.  Words  in  which  a  light  vowel  is  preceded  by  a 

heavy  VOWel  or  diphthong  are  frequently  contracted,  as  power, 
jeiuel,  lower,  doing,  going,  dying,  playing,  prowess,  £c. 

"The  which  |  no  soon  |  er  had  |  his  prowm  |  confirm'd." 

Macbeth,  v.  8.  41. 
Comp.  "  And  he  that  routs  most  pigs  and  cows, 

The  form  |  idab  |  lest  man  j  of  prowess." 

Hudib.  iii.  3.  357. 
Perhaps 

"  Which  both  I  thy  du  |  ty  owes  |  and  our  |  pmuer  claims." 

A.  W.  ii.  3.  168. 

(This   supposes    "our"   emphasized   by  antithesis,   but    "and   our 
pow  |  er  claims"  (ELLIS)  may  be  the  correct  scanning.) 

Being.— "That  with  |  his  per  |  emptor  |  y  "shall"  |  being •$<&." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  94,  2.  81. 
"  The  sov  |  ereignty  |  of  ei  |  ther  being  \  so  great." 

R.  o/L.  69. 
This  explains  the  apparent  Alexandrines  : 

"  And  being  \  but  a  toy  |  that  is  |  no  grief  |  to  give." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  I.  114. 
"  Without  |  a  parall  |  el,  these  |  being  all  |  my  study." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  74. 

Doing. —  "Can  lay  |  to  bed  |  for  ever:  |  whiles  you,  |  </0/«£-thiis." 

Ib.  ii.  i.  284. 
Seeing. — "  Or  seeing  |  it  of  j  such  child  |  ish  friend  |  line'ss." 

Coriol.  ii.  3.  183. 
"  I'll  in  |  myself  |  to  see,  |  and  in  thee  |  seeing  ill." 

Rick.  II.  ii.  i.  94. 

"  That  you  |  at  such  |  times  seeing  \  me  ne  |  ver  shall." 

Hamlet,  i.  5.  172. 

•ying. — "  And  prdph  \  esying  \  with  ac  |  cents  te'r  |  rible." 

Macbeth,  ii.  3    62. 
This  may  explain 

"  Lock'd  in  |  her  mon(u)  [468]  |  ment.  She'd  |  &prfph(e}~  \ 
sying  fear." — A.  and  C.  iv.  14.  120. 

So  with  other  participles,  as 

"They,  knowing  \  dame  E'l  [  eanor's  |  aspir  |  ing  humour." 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  97. 

A   A   2 


356  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

The  rhythm  seems  to  demand  that  "coward"  should  be  a  quasi- 
monosyllable  in 

"  Wrong  right,  |  base  noble,  |  old  young,  [  coward  val  |  iant." 

T.  A.  iv.  I.  29. 
"  Noble"  a  monosyllable.     (See  465. ) 

"  Yet  are  j  they  pass  |  ing  cdwardly.  \  But  I'  |  beseech  you." 

Coriol.  i.  I.  207. 

471.  The  plural  and  possessive  cases  of  nouns  in  which 
the  singular  ends  in  s,  se,  ss,  ce,  and  ge,  are  frequently 

written,  and  still  more  frequently  pronounced,  without  the  additional 
syllable  : 

"  A's  the  |  dead  cdr  \  casses  of  |  unbiir  |  ied  men. " 

Coriol.  iii.  3.  122. 
"Thinking  |  upon  |  his  ser  \  vices  took  |  from  you." 

Ib.  ii.  2.  231. 

"Their  sense  \  are  [Fol.  sic]  shut. "— Macbeth,  v.  I.  29. 
"My  sense  \  are  stopped." — Sonn.  1 1 2. 
" These  -verse"— DANIEL. 
"I'll  to  |  him;  he  |  is  hid  |  at  Ldwr  \  ence1  cell." 

R.  andj.  iii.  2.  141. 

"  Great  kings  of  France  and  England  !    That  I  have  laboured, 
Your  might  \  iness  \  on  both  |  parts  best  |  can  witness." 

Hen.  V.  v.  2.  28. 
"  Place"  is  probably  used  for  "places"  in 

"  The    fresh  \  springs,    brine-  |  pits,     bar  |  ren    place  \  and 

fertile."—  Tempest,  i.  2.  338. 
"  These  two  I  Antiph  \  olus  [Folio],  I  these  two  I  so  like." 

C.  o/E.  v.  i.  357. 

"Are  there  balance?"— M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  255. 
"  (Here)  have  I,  thy  schoolmaster,  made  thee  more  profit 
Than    6th  |  er    prin  \  cess    [Folio]    can  |  that    have  |  more 

time."—  Temp.  i.  2.  173. 
"  Sits  on  his  horse  back  at  mine  hostess  door." 

K.  y.  ii.  I.  289  (Folio). 
"  Looked  pale  |  when  they  |  did  hear  |  of  Clar  \  ence  (Folio) 

death."— Rich.  III.  ii.  I.  137,  iii.  i.  144. 
Probably  the  s  is  not  sounded  (horse  is  the  old  plural)  in 

"  And  Duncan's  horses  (a  thing  most  strange  and  certain)." 

Macbeth,  ii.  4.  14. 
"  Lies  in  their  purses,  and  whoso  empties  them." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  130. 


WORDS  CONTRACTED  IN  PRONUNCIATION.    357 

Even  after  ge  the  s  was  often  suppressed,  even  where  printed. 
Thus: 

"  How  many  ways  shall  Carthage's  glory  grow  !" 

SuRREY's^£;/«<//r.  (Walker). 

But  often  the  s  was  not  written.     So 

' '  In  violating  marriage  sacred  law. " 

Edward  III.  (1597  A.D.)  (LAMB.) 
The  s  is  perhaps  not  pronounced  in 

"  Conje'ct  |  (u)ral  mdrr  \  iage(s);  mak  |  ing  part  |  ies  strong." 

Coriol.  i.  i.  198. 
"  Are  bra  I  zen  im  \  ages  of  |  canon  (491)  |  iz'd  saints." 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  63. 
"  The  fm  \  ages  of  |  revolt  |  and  fty  |  ing  off!" 

Lear,  ii.  4.  91. 

"  O'ff  with  |  his  son  |  George's  head."— Rich.  III.  v.  3.  344. 
"  Letters  |  should  not  |  be  known,  |  riches  pov  |  erty." 

Tempest,  ii.  I.  150. 

This  may  perhaps  explain  the  apparent  Alexandrines  : 

"  I  prom  I  is'd  you  I  redress  I  of  these  I  same  grievances." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  2.  113. 
"  This  dei  |  ty  in  |  my  bos  |  om  twen  |  ty  consciences." 

Temp.  ii.  I.  278. 
"  And   straight  |  disclaim  |  their    tongues  ?  |    What  are  |  your 

offices?" — Coriol.  iii.  I.  35. 
"  Popil  I  ius  Le  I  na  speaks  |  not  of  I  our  tiir  \  poses." 

J.  C.  iii.  I.  23. 
"  She  lev  |  ell'd  at  |  our  ptir  \  poses,  and  |  being  (470)  royal," 

A.  and  C.  v.  2.  339. 
(or  "|  our  ptirpose(s),  \  and  be  |  ing  royal.") 

"  A  thing  |  most  bru  |  tish,  I'  |  endowed  |  thy  ptirposes. " 

Tempest,  i.  2.  357. 
"  Nor  when  |  ^^  purposes  \  return.  |  Beseech  |  your  highness. " 

Cymb.  iv.  3.  15. 
"  As  blanks,  |  benevo  \  lences  and  |  I  wot  [  not  what." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  250. 
"  My  serv  \  ices  which  |  I  have  ('ve)  done  |  the  Sign  |  iory." 

Othello,  \.  2.  18. 

"  These  pipes  |  and  these  |  convey  \  ances  of  |  our  blood." 

Coriol.  v.  I.  54. 

"  Professes  \  to  persuade  |  the  king  |  his  son's  |  alive." 

Temp.  ii.  I.  236. 


3$8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Either  "  whom  I "  is  a  detached  foot  (499)  or  s  is  mute  in 

"  Whom  I',  |  with  this  |  obed  |  ient  steel,  |  three  inch^r  of   it 
(inch  of  't)."—  Tempest,  ii.  I.  285. 

472,  Ed  following  d  or  t  is  often  not  written  (this 
elision  is  very  old:  see  341,  342),  and,  when  written, 
often  not  pronounced. 

"  I  had  |  not  quota/  him.  |  I  fear'd  |  he  did  |  but  trifle." 

Hamlet,  ii.  I.  112. 
"  Reg.     That  tended  (Globe,   'tend')  |  upon  |  my  father. 

Glou.  I  know  |  not,  madam." — Lear,  ii.  i.  97. 
"  Since  not  I  to  be  I  avoids  I  it  falls  I  on  me." 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  13. 
"  But  just  I  ly  as  I  you  have  |  exceed^  I  all  promise." 

A.  Y.  L.  i.  2.  156. 
•    "  For  treas  |  on  ex<?  |  cuW  in  j  our  late  |  king's  days." 

I  Hen.  VI.  ii.  4.  91. 
"  And  so,  I  rivet^  |  with  faith  |  unto  (457)  |  your  flesh." 

M.  of  V.  v.  i.  169. 
"  Be  soon  |  collect  |  ed  and  all  |  things  thought  |  upon." 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  305. 
"  I's  to  |  be  frighte/  |  out  of  fear  :  |  and  in  |  that  mood." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  196. 
"  Was  apt  |  ly  fitted  |  and  nat  |  (u) rally  |  perform'd." 

T.  ofSh.  Ind.  I.  87. 
"  Is  n6w  |  convert:  |  but  now  I  I  was  |  the  lord." 

M.  ofV.  iii.  2.  169. 
"  Which  I'  |  mistrust^/  |  not:  fare  |  well  there  |  fore,  Hero." 

M.  Ado,  ii.  I.  189. 
"  All  un  |  avoid^  |  is  the  doom  |  of  dest  |  iny." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  217. 

but  here  "destiny"  (467)  may  be  a  dissyllable,  and  -ed sonant. 
This  explains  the  apparent  Alexandrine  : 

"  I  thus  |  neglect  |  ing  world  |  ly  ends  |  all  dedicated" 

Temp.  i.  2.  89. 
"Shouting  |  their  em  |  ula  |  tion.  What  |  v->  granted  them  1 " 

Coriol.  i.  I.  218. 

So  strong  was  the  dislike  to  pronouncing  two  dental  syllables 
together,  that  "it"  seems  nearly  or  quite  lost  after  "set"  and 
"  let "  in  the  following  : 

"  I  hiimb  |  ly  set  it  \  at  your  will  ;  |  but  for  |  my  mistress." 

Cymb.  iv.  3.  9. 


VARIABLE  SYLLABLES.  359 

"  To  his  ]  exper  |  ienced  tongue  ;  |  yet  let  it  \  please  both." 

Tr.  and  6V.  i.  3.  68. 
"  You  are  a  |  young  hunt  |  sman,   Mar  |  cus  :  let  it  alone." 

T.  A.  iv.  2.  101. 
"  You  see  |  is  kill'd  |  in  him  :  |  and_y#  it  \  is  danger." 

Lear,  iv.  7.  79. 
So  perhaps  "  Of  ex  |  cellent  |  dissemb  |  ling  ;  and  |  let  it  look." 

A.  and  C.  i.  3.  79. 
But  more  probably,  "  dissembling ;  |  and  let  j  it  look." 

473.  Est  in  superlatives  is  often  pronounced  st  after 

dentals  and  liquids.    A  similar  euphonic  contraction  with  respect 

to  est  in  verbs  is  found  in  E.  E.     Thus  **  bindest  "  becomes  "binst," 

"  eatest "  becomes  "  est."  Our  "best  "  is  a  contraction  for  "  bet-est." 

"Two  of  |  the  sweet' st  \  compan  |  ions  in  |  the  world." 

Cymb.  v.  5.  349. 

"  At  your  |  kindest  leisure." — Macbeth ,  ii.  I.  24. 
"  The  stern' st  \  good  night."— Jb.  ii.  2.  4. 
"  Secret' st."— Ib.  iii.  4.  126. 

"  This  is  |  thy  eldest  \  son's  son." — K.  J.  ii.  I.  177. 
So  Temp.  v.  i.  186. 

"  Since  death  |  of  my  |  dear'st  moth  |  er." — Cymb.  iv.2. 190. 
41  The  I6y  \  al'st  hus  |  band  that  |  did  e'er  |  plight  troth." 

Ib.  i.  i.  96. 

A.  W.  ii.  i.  163,    "greatst."      "  The  fivect'st,   dear'st."— W.  T. 
iii.   2.   202.     "  Near1  st."— Macb.   iii.    I.   118.      "  Unpleasant' st."- 
M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  254.     " Strongest. "— Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  201.     "Shorfst." 
— Ib.  v.    i.    80.     "  Common 'st." — Ib.  v.   3.    17.     " FaithfulF st. "- 
T.  N.  v.  i.  117. 
This  lasted  past  the  Elizabethan  period. 

"  Know  there  are  rhymes  which  fresh  and  fresh  apply'd 
Will  cure  the  arrant' st  puppy  of  his  pride." 

POPE.  /////'/.  Hor.  Epist.  i.  60. 
The  Folio  reads  "  stroakst,"  and  "made  "  in 

* '  Thou  str6akedst  \  me  and  |  ma  Jest  much  |  of  me,  |  would' st 

give  me." — Tempest,  i.  2.  333. 
But  the  accent  on  "and  "  is  harsh.     Perhaps  "and  ma  |  dest." 

VARIABLE     SYLLABLES. 

474.  Ed  final  is  often  mute  and  sonant  in  the  same 

line.    Just  as  one  superlative  inflection  -est  does  duty  for  two  closely 
connected  adjectives  (398)-  :• 


360  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  The  generous  and  graver/  citizens." — M.  for  M.  iv.  6.  l<i. 
and  the  adverbial  inflection  ly  does  duty  for  two  adverbs  (397)  : 

"And  she  will  speak  most  bitter/j/and  strange." 

M.forM.  v.  i.  36. 

so,  when  two  participles  ending  in  -ed  are   closely  connected   by 
"and,"  the  ed  in  one  is  often  omitted  in  pronunciation. 

"  Desptid,  |  distress  \  ed,  hat  |  ed,  mart  |  yr'd,  killed." 

R.  andj.  iv.  5.  59. 
"We  have  with  |  a  leav  \  en'd  and  \prepdr  \  ed  choice." 

M.forM.  i.  i.  52. 
"To  this  |  nnlooKd  \  for,  tin  \  prepdr  \  ed  pomp." 

K.  J.  ii.  i.  560. 
In  the  following  the  -ed  sonant  precedes  : 

"  That  were  |  embdtt  \  ailed  \  and  rdnk'd  \  in  Kent." 

K.  J.  iv.  2.  200. 
"We  are  |  impress  \  ed  and  \  engaged  \  to  fight." 

i  Hen.  IV.  i.  i.  21. 
"For  this  |  they  have  |  engross  \  ed  and  |  pil'd  up." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  5.  71. 

"Thou  chdng  \  ed  and  |  self-c6v  \  er'd  thing,  |  for  shame." 

Lear,  iv.  2.  62. 
At  the  end  of  a  line  ed  is  often  sounded  after  er : 

"  Which  his  |  hell-gov  |  ern'd  arm  |  hath  kite  \  hered." 

Rich.  III.  i.  2.  74. 

See  J.  C.  ii.  I.  208  ;  iii.  I.  17  ;  iii.  2.  7,  10  ;  iv.  I.  47;  v.  I.  1. 
So  Rick.  III.  iii.  7.  136  ;  iv.  3.  17  ;  v.  3.  92  ;  M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  13, 
&c.  This  perhaps  arises  in  part  from  the  fact  that  "  er  "  final  in 
itself  (478)  has  a  lengthened  sound  approaching  to  a  dissyllable. 

Ed  is  very  frequently  pronounced  in  the  participles  of  words 
ending  in  fy,  "glori/y,"  &c. 

"Most  put  |  rift  |  ed  core,  |  so  fair  |  without." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  9.  1. 
"My  m6rt  \ifi\ed  spirit.  |   Now  bid  |  me  run." 

J.  C.  ii.  i.  324. 
"Vaughan  |  and  all  |  that  have  |  miscdrr  \  ied." 

Rich.  III.  v.  I.  5. 
"The  French  |  and  E'ng  |  lish  there  |  miscdr  \  ried." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  8.  29. 

"That  came  |  too  lag  |  to  see  |  him  bii  \  ried."—Il>.  ii.  I.  90. 
So  frequently  in  other  Elizabethan  authors.  Also  when  preceded 
byr«,  rm,  "turmv/,"  "  confirm*/,"  &c.,  and  in  "followed:" 


VARIABLE  SYLLABLES.  361 

"  As  they  |  us  to  |  our  trench  |  es/t>7/  | 

Coriol.  i.  4.  42. 
On  the  other  hand,  -ed  is  mute  in 

"  By  what  I  by-paths  I  and  in  I  direct  I  crooKdvrfaf*." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  5.  185. 

In     "  Warder.  We  do  |  no  6th  |  erwise  |  than  we  |  are  wilFd. 
Glou.   Who    will  |  ed   you  ?  |    Or    whose  |  will    stands  | 

but  mine,"— i  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  11. 

it  would  seem  that  the  latter  "willed"  is  the  more  emphatic  of  the 
two,  and  it  will  probably  be  found  that  in  many  cases  where  two 
participles  are  connected,  the  more  emphatic  has  ed  sonant.  Thus 
the  former  "banished"  is  the  more  emphatic  of  the  two  in 

' '  Hence  ban  \  is/u-d  \  is  bams/I'd  from  |  the  world. " 

R.  and  J.  iii.  3.  19. 

475.  A  word  repeated  twice  in  a  verse  often  receives 
two  accents  the  first  time,  and  one  accent  the  second, 
when  it  is  less  emphatic  the  second  time  than  the  first. 
Or  the  word  may  occupy  the  whole  of  a  foot  the  first 
time,  and  only  part  of  a  foot  the  second.  Thus  in 

" Fdre  (480)  I  well,  gen  I  tie  mi's  I  tress  :  fdre  \  well.  Nan." 

J/.  W.  of  W.  iii.  4.  97. 
"/bVtf  (480)  1  well,  gen  |  tie  cous  |  in.     Coz,  l/m-Kv//." 

K.  J.  iii.  2.  17. 

"  Of  great  |  est  just  |  ice.      Wrl  \  ^(484),  -write,  \  Rinaldo." 

A.  W.  iii.  4.  29. 
"These  vl  \  olent  \  desires  I  have  vio  \  lent  ends." 

R.  andj.  ii.  6.  9. 
"With  her  I  that  hdt  \  eth  thee  |  and  hates  \  us  all." 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  4.  62. 
Here  the  emphasis  is  on  "ends"  and  "us  all." 


Duke.  Still  (&6) 
Olh.  Still 


so  cru  |  el ? 


so  con  |  stant,  lord." — T.  N.  v.  i.  113. 
"  Com.  Know  (484),  |  I  pray  |  you. 

Coriol.  1'  |    11  know  |  no  further." — Coriol.  iii.  3.  87. 

"  Deso  |  late,  dJs  \  olate,  will  |  I  hence  |  and  die." 

Rich.  II.  i.  2.  73. 

The  former  "Antony"  is  the  more  emphatic  in 

"But  were  |  I  Brutus 
And  Brii  I  tus  An  \  tony,  \  there  were  |  an  Antony" 

\J.  C.  iii.  2.  231. 


362  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

So,  perhaps,  the  more  emphatic  verb  has  the  longer  form  in 
"He  rous  |  cth  up  |  himself  |  and  mak^r  |  a  pause." 

R.  ofL.  541. 

This  is  often  the  case  with  diphthongic  monosyllables.     See  484. 
Compare 

"  N6w  |  it  schey  |  neth,  now  \  it  reyn  |  eth  faste." 

CHAUCER,  C.  T.  1537. 

476.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  word  increases  in 
emphasis,  the  converse  takes  place. 

"And  let  |  thy  blows,  |  ddubly  \  reddub  \  (e)lM." 

Rich.  II.  i.  3.  80. 
"  Virg.   O,  heavens,  \  O,  hlav  \  ens. 

Coriol.  Nay,  |  I  pri  |  thee,  woman." 

Coriol.  iv.  I.  12. 
"Was  it  |  his  spirit  \  by  spir  \  its  taught  |  to  write?" 

Sonn.  86. 
"And  with  |  farperson  \  age,  her  |  t&llper  \  sondge." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  292. 

"  Marcius  \  would  have  |  all  from  |  you — Mar  \  tins, 
Whom  late  |  you  have  named  |  for  consul." 

Coriol.  iii.  i.  95. 

Even  at  the  end  of  the  verse  Marcius  has  but  one  accent,  as  a  rule. 
But  here  it  is  unusually  emphasized. 

.     "And  whPr  \  he  run  |  or  fly  |  they  know  |  not  whether." 

V.  and  A.  304. 

"King.  Be  pat  \  tent,  gent  |  le  queen,  |  and  I'  |  will  stay. 
Queen.   Who  can  |  be  pat  \  ient  \  in  these  |  extremes." 

Zffen.   VI.  i.  i.  215-6. 
"  Yield,  my  lord  |  protect  |  or,yt  \  eld,  Winch  |  ester." 

I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  i.  112. 
"  Citizens.    Yield,  Mar  |  cius,  y{  \  eld. 
Men.  He  |  ar  (480)  me,  |  one  word." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  215. 

"A  dtvil  (466),  |  a  bor  |  n  (485)  de  \  vil,  in  |  whose  nature." 

Tempest,  iv.  I.  188. 

Soarrange^  "You  heavens  (512),  | 

Give  me  |  that  pat  \  ience,  pdt  \  ience  \  I  need." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  274. 

("  Patient"  was  treated  as  a  trisyllable  by  the  orthoepists  of  the 
time.) 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  363 

"Bring  hail,  |  to  tri  |  umph  6J  \  ing  (on   the   other  hand) 

lack'd,  |  to  hope." — Sunn.  52. 
Similarly  "Which  art  |  my  nearest  \  and  dtar  \  est  en  |  emy1." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  123. 

On  the  other  hand,  perhaps,  "sire,"  and  not  "cowards,"  is  a 
dissyllable  in 

"Cowards  fa  |  ther  cowards,  |  and  base  |  things  si  \  re  base." 

Cymb.  iv.  2.  26. 

So,  perhaps,    "Panting  |  he  lies  \  and  breath  |  eth'm  \  her  face." 

V.  and  A.  62. 
Here  "lies"  is  unemphatic,  "breatheth"  emphatic. 

For  diphthongic  monosyllables  see  484. 

The  same  variation  is  found  in  modern  poetry.  In  the  following 
line  thefe  is,  as  it  were,  an  antithetical  proportion  in  which  the  two 
middle  terms  are  emphatic,  while  the  extremes  are  unemphatic  : 

"  Tower  be  |  yond  t6w  \  er,  sp{  \  re  be  |  yond  spire" — TENNYSON. 

LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS. 

477.  R,  and  liquids  in  dissyllables,  are  frequently  pro- 
nounced as  though  an  extra  vowel  were  introduced  between  them 
and  the  preceding  consonant : 

' '  The  parts  |  and  gra  |  ces  of  |  the  wres  |  t(^)ler. " 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  2.  13. 
"  In  sec  |  ond  ace  ]  ent  of  |  his  ord  |  (*')nance." 

//,-//.  V.  ii.  4.  126. 

The  Folio  inserts  /  here,  and  e,  Ib.  iii.  Prologue,  26.  In  the 
latter  passage  the  word  is  a  dissyllable. 

"  If  you  |  will  tar  |  ry,  ho  |  ly  pi'lg  |  (^)rim." — A.  IV.  iii.  5.43. 
"  While  she  |  did  call  |  me  ras  [  cal  fid  |  dfc)ler." 

T.  ofSh.  ii.  i.  158. 
"The  life  |  of  him.  |  Know'st  thou  |  this  coun  |  t(^)ry  ?" 

T.  N.  i.  2.  21.     So  Coriol.  i.  9.  17 ;  2  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  206. 
"  And  these  |  two  Drom  |  ios,  one  |  in  semb  |  (^)lance." 

C.  ofE.  v.  i.  358  ;  T.  G.  of  V.  i.  3.  84. 
"  You,  the  |  great  toe  |  of  this  |  assemb  |  l(e)y." 

Coriol.  i.  I.  158. 
"  Cor.  Be  thus  |  to  them.  | 

Patr.  You  do  |  the  no  |  b(^)ler. "—//,.  iii.  2.  6. 

"  Edm.   Sir,  you  |  speak  no  |  b(e)l\.  | 
Reg.  Wrhy  is  |  this  reason'd  ?  ''— Lear,  \.  I.  28. 


364  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

(?)      "  Go  search  |  like  no  |  bale's,  |  like  no  |  ble  subjects." 

P.  of  T.  ii.  4.  50. 

The  e  is  actually  inserted  in  the  Folio  of  Titus  Andronicus  in 
"brethren:" 

"Give  Mu  |  cius  bur  |  ial  with  |  his  breth  |  <?ren." 

T.  A.i.  I.  347. 
And  this  is  by  derivation  the  correct  form,  as  also  is  "  children." 

"These  are  j  the  par  |  ents  of  |  these  chil  I  dfc)ren." 

C.  ofE.  v.  i.  360. 
"I  go.  |    Write  to  |  me  ver  |  y  short  |  (*)ly." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  428. 
"A  rot  |  ten  case  |  abides  |  no  hand  [  (<?)ling." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  I.  161. 
"The  friends  |  of  France  |  our  shrouds  |  and  tack  |  filings." 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  3.  18. 
"Than  B61  |  ingbroke's  |  return  |  to  E'ng  |  (<?)land." 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  17. 
"And  mean  |  to  make  |  her  queen  |  of  E'ng  |  (^)land." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  263. 
So  in  E.  E.  "  England." 

"  To  be  |  in  an  |  ger  is  |  impi  |  ety"  ; 
But  who  |  is  man  |  that  is  |  not  an  |  g(<?)ry?" 

T.  of  A.  iii.  5.  56. 

in  which  last  passage  the  rhyme  indicates  that  angry  must  be  pro- 
nounced as  a  trisyllable. 

"And  strength  |  by  limp  |  ing  sway  |  disa  |  bfc)led. "— Sonn.  66. 
So  also  in  the  middle  of  lines — 

"Is  Cade  |  the  son  |  of  Hen  |  (e)rf  \  the  Fifth?" 

2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  8.  36. 

This  is  common  in  Hen.  VI. ,  but  not  I  think  in  the  other  plays— 
not  for  instance  in  Rich.  II. 

"That  croaks  j  the  fa  |  tal  en  |  t(^rance  |  of  Duncan." 

Macbeth,  i.  5.  40. 
"Carries  |  no  fa  |  vour  in't  |  but  Bert  |  (gram's." 

A.  W.  i.  i.  94. 
"  O  me  !  |  you  jiigg  |  (e]\ir  \  \  you  can  [  ker  blossom." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  282. 
"'Tis  monst  |  (#)rous.  j  la  |  go,  who  |  began  it?" 

Othello,  ii.  3.  217. 
"  And  that  |  hath  dazz  |  (<r)led  I  my  rea  |  son's  light." 

T.  G.  ofV.  ii.  4.  210. 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  365 

"Being  |  so  frus  |  t(#)rate.  |    Tell  him  |  he  mocks." 

A.  and  C.  v.  i.  2. 
' '  Lord  Doug  |  (^)las,  |  go  you  |  and  tell  |  him  so. " 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  33. 
"  Grace  and  I  remem  I  bMrance  I  be  to  I  you  both." 

W.  T.  iv.  4.  76. 
"Of  quick  |  cross  light  |  fc)ning?  |  To  watch,  |  poor  perdu." 

Lear,  iv.  7.  35. 
"Thou  kill'st  |  thy  mist  |  fc)ress  :  J  but  well  |  and  free." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  27. 
"To  taunt  |  at  slack  |  (^)ness.  |  Canid  |  ius  we." 

Ib.  iii.  7.  28. 

So  also  probably  "sec(^)ret,"  "monst(^)rous"  (Macbeth,  iii.  6.  8), 
"nob(*)ly,"  "wit(<r)ness,"  T.  G.ofV.'w.  2. 110,  and  even"cap(/)tains" 
(l-'rench  "  capitaine  :"  Macbeth,  i.  2.  34,  3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  7.  32,  and 
perhaps  Othello,  i.  2.  53). 

Spenser  inserts  the  e  in  some  of  these  words,  as  "handling," 
F.  Q.  i.  8.  28  ;  "enta-ance,"  ib.  34. 

478.  Er  filial  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  pronounced  with  a 
kind  of  "  burr,"  which  produced  the  effect  of  an  additional  syllable  ; 
just  as  "Sirrah"  is  another  and  more  vehement  form  of  "Sir." 
Perhaps  this  may  explain  the  following  lines,  some  of  which  may  be 
explained  by  505-10,  but  not  all  : 

"  Corn.   We'll  teach  |  you 

Kent.  Sir,  \  I'm  |  too  old  |  to  learn." 

Lear,  ii.  2.  135. 
(But?  "I' am.") 

"  Lends  the  |  tongue  vows  ;  |  these  bla  |  zes  daugh  |  ter." 

Hamlet,  i.  3.  117. 
"  And  there  |  upon,  |  give  me  |  your  ddugh     tir." 

Hen.   V.  v.  2.  475. 
"Bru.   Spread  fur  |  ther.  \ 

Maicn.  One  wo  |  rd  (485)  more,  |  one  word." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  311. 
"  Like  a  |  ripe  si's  |  ter :  \  the  worn  |  an  low." 

A.   Y.  L.  iv.  3.  88. 
"Of  our  |  dear  souls.  |    Meantime,  |  sweet  si's  |  ter." 

T.  N.\.  i.  393. 
"  I  priy  |  you,  uncle  (465),  |  give  me  |  this  das;  |  gtr." 

Rich.  I'll.  iii.  i.  110. 
"A  broth  j  ers  mur  |  der.  \  Pray  can  |  I  not." 

Hamlet,  iii.  3.  38. 


366  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Frighted  |  each  6th  |  £-.  |  Why  should  |  he  follow?" 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  6. 
"And  so  |  to  arms,  [  victor  |  ious  fa  |  ther" 

2  Hen.   VI.  v.  i.  211. 
"To  cease.  |   Wast  thou  |  ordain'd,  |  dear  fa  |  ther?" 

Ib.  v.  2.  45. 
"  Corn.   Where  hast  |  thou  sent  |  the  king?  | 

Clone.  To  D6  |  ver" — Lear,  iii.  7.  51. 

"Will  I'  |  first  work.  |  He's  for  |  his  mas  j  ttr"—Cymb.  i.  5.  28. 
' '  Lear.  Than  the  |  sea-mons  |  t&r.  \ 

Alb.  Pray,  sir,  |  be  patient."— Lear,  i.  4.  283. 

But  perhaps  "  patient"  may  have  two  accents.     In  that  case  "  ter" 
is  a  pause-extra  syllable. 

In  the  two  following  lines  s  follows  the  r : 

"To  speak  j  of  hor  |  r6rs,  \  he  comes  |  before  me." 

Hamlet,  ii.  i.  84. 
"  Publius,  |  how  now  ?  |   How  now,  |  my  mas  |  ters  ?" 

T.  A.  iv.  3.  35 ;  and  perhaps  Macbeth,  iii.  4.  133. 
"And  give  |  him  half:  |  and  for  |  thy  vi'g  |  6ur." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  272. 
"Tell  me,  |  how  fares  |  our  lov  |  ing  moth  |  er?" 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  82. 
"  Cass.  Good  night,  ]  my  lord.  | 

Bntt.  Good  night,  |  good  broth  |  Jr." 

y.  C.  iv.  3.  237. 
"He  whom  J  my  fath  |  er  named?  |  Your  E'd  |  gar." 

Lear,  ii.  I.  94. 
(?   "mf(4§4)  1  med?     Yoi't  \  r  (480)  E'dgar.") 

"I'll  fol  |  low  you  |  and  tell  |  what  an  |  swe'r." 

3  Hen.   VI.  iv.  3.  55. 
"I  have  six  |  ty  sail :  |  Cae'sar  |  none  bet  |  ter." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  7.  50. 
"This  wood  |  en  sla  |  very,  than  |  to  siiff  j  <fr." 

Temp.  iii.  I.  62. 

Sometimes  this  natural  burr  on  r  influences  the  spelling.  In 
Genesis  and  Exodus  (Early  English  Text  Society,  Ed.  Morris)  \ve 
have  "coren"  for  "corn,"  "boren"  for  "born."  Thus  the  E.  E. 
"thurh"  is  spelt  "thorugh"  by  early  writers,  and  hence  even  by 
Shakespeare  in 

"The  false  [  revolt  |  ing  Nor  |  mans  th6  \  rough  thee." 

2  Hen.  \  7.  iv.  i.  87. 
So  M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  3,  5 ;  Coriol.  v.  3-115. 


LEX(JT1II-:.\1XG  OF  WORDS.  367 

In  the  following  difficult  lines  it  may  be  that  r  introduces  an 
extra  syllable  : 

"  I'gnomy  |  in  ran  |  som  and  |  free  pa  |  rd6n 
A're  of  |  two  hou  |  ses,   law  |  ful  me"  |  rcy" 

Jr.  for  M.  ii.  4.  Ill,  112. 

It  would  of  course  save  trouble  to  read  "  ignominy,"  against  the 
Folio.  But  compare 

"  Thy  Ig  |  nomy  (Fol.)  |  sleep  with  |  thee  in  |  thy  grave." 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  100. 
"  Hence,  brok  |  er  lack  |  ey  !     I'g  |  nomj  |  and  shame." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  10.  33. 

and  in  T.  A.  iv.  2.  115  (where  the  Folio  reads  "ignominy")  the  i 
is  slurred. 

"No  man  I  knows  whither.  |    I  cry  |  thee  mt\  rcy." 

Kick.  III.  iv.  4.  515. 
"It  is  !  my  son,  I  young  Har  I  ry  Pi  \  rcy." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  21. 

"Thou,   Rich  I  ard,  shall  I  to  the  duke  |  of  N6r  \folk." 

3  Hen.   VI.  i.  2.  38. 

So  we  sometimes  find  the  old  comparative  "  near  "  for  the  modern 
"  nearer." 

"Better  I  far  6ff  |  than  near  |  be  ne'er  |  the  near." 

Rich.  II.  v.  I.  88. 
"The  rear  \  in  blood  | 
The  near  |  er  bloody."— Macbeth,  ii.  3.  146. 
"  Nor  near  nor  farther  off .  .  .  than  this  weak  arm." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  64. 
And  "far"  for  "farther,"  the  old  "ferror." 

'"Far  than  |  Deuca  |  lion  off."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  442. 

479.  The  termination  "ion  "  is  frequently  pronounced  as  two 
syllables  at  the  end  of  a  line.  The  i  is  also  sometimes  pronounced 
as  a  distinct  syllable  in  soldier,  courtier,  marriage,  conscience,  partial, 
&c.  ;  less  frequently  the  e  in  surgeon,  vengeance,  /V.,v<////,  creature, 
p/easiirs,  and  treasure. 

The  cases  in  which  ion  is  pronounced  in  the  middle  of  a  line  are 
rare.  I  have  only  been  able  to  collect  the  following  : 

"  With  6b  I  serva  I  lion  I  the  which  |  he  \ 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  41. 


368  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Of  Ham  |  let's  trans  |  forma  |  tidn :  \  so  call  it." 

Hani  Id,  ii.  2.  5. 
"Be  chosen  |  with  pr6  |  clama  [  tions  \  to-day." 

T.  A.  i.  i.  190. 

Gill,  1621,  always  writes  "  ti-on"  as  two  syllables.  But  there  is 
some  danger  in  taking  the  books  of  orthoepists  as  criteria  of  popular 
pronunciation.  They  are  too  apt  to  set  down,  not  what  is,  but 
what  ought  to  be.  The  Shakespearian  usage  will  perhaps  be 
found  a  better  guide. 

Tidn,  when  preceded  by  c,  is  more  frequently  prolonged,  perhaps 
because  the  c  more  readily  attracts  the  /  to  itself,  and  leaves  ion 
uninfluenced  by  the  t. 

"It  were  |  an  hon  |  est  act  |  i6n  \  to  say  so." 

Othello,  ii.  3.  145  ;   Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  340. 
"Her  sweet  |  perfect  |  tins  \  with  one  |  self  king." 

T.  N.  i.  i.  39. 
"Yet  have  |  I  fierce  |  affect  |  tins  \  and  think." 

A.  and  C.  i.  5.  17. 
"  With  sore  |  distract  |  tin  \  what  I'  |  have  done." 

Hamlet,  v.  2.  241. 

"To  us  |  in  our  |  elect  |  tin  \  this  day." — T.  A.  i.  I.  235. 
In     "  That  shall  |  make  ans  |  wer  to  |  such  quest  |  tins. 
It  is  enough.  |  I'll  think  |  upon  |  the  quest  |  tins" 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  80,  82. 

it  seems  unlikely  that  "questions"  is  to  be  differently  scanned  in 
two  lines  so  close  together.  And  possibly,  "it  is  (it's)  enough,"  is 
one  foot.  Still,  if  "  questions"  in  the  second  verse  be  regarded  as 
an  unemphatic  (475)  repetition,  it  might  be  scanned  : 

"It  is  |  enough.  |  I'll  think  |  upon  |  the  questions." 
The  Globe  has 

"  Join'd  in  |  commiss  \  ion  with  him  ;  |  but  either  (466)  | 
Had  borne  |j  the  action  of  yourself,  or  else 
To  him  ||  had  left  it  solely." — Coriol.  iv.  6.  14. 

But  better  arrange  as  marked  above,  avoiding  the  necessity  of  laying 
two  accents  on  "commission."  So  Folio — which,  however,  is  not  of 
•much  weight  as  regards  arrangement. 
/  is  pronounced  in  "business"  in 

"To  see  |  this  bits  \  iness.  \    To-mor  |  row  next." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  217;  Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  144:  M.  of  V.  iv. 
I.  127  ;  Coriol.  v.  3.  4. 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  369 

"  Divm  I  est  c re"  \  attire,  \  Astra'  I  a's  daughter." 

i  Hen.  VI.  i.  6.  4. 
So  probably 

"  Than  these  I  two  ere"  \  attires.  \    Which  is  I  Sebastian  ?  " 

T.  N.  v.  i.  231. 

"  But  he's  |  a  tried  |  and  val  |  iant  s6ld  \  ifr." — J.  C.  iv.  i.  28. 
44  Your  sis  |  ter  is  |  the  bet  |  ter  s6l  \  dier." — Lear,  iv.  5.  3. 
"Making  |  them  worn  |  en  of  |  good  cdrr  \  idge." 

R.  and  J.  i.  4.  94. 
"  Mdrri  \  age  is  |  a  mat  |  ter  of  |  more  wor  |  th." 

I  Hen.   VI.  v.  5.  55,  v.  i.  21. 
"  To  woo  I  a  maid  I  in  way  |  of  mdrr  \  idge.1' 

M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  13. 
"  While  I'  I  thy  dm  \  id  \  ble  cheeks  |  do  coy." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  2. 

"Young,  vdl  |  idnt,  \  wise,  and,  |  no  doubt,  |  right  royal." 
Rich.  III.  i.  I.  245;   Tempest,  iii.  2.  27. 
"  With  th'  an  \  cihit  \  of  war  |  on  our  |  proceedings." 

Lear,  v.  I.  32. 

"You    have    done  |  our    plt\  asrires  \  much    grace,  |  fair 
ladies."—/:  of  A.  i.  2.151. 

So        "  Take  her  I  and  use  I  her  at  |  your///  |  asiin:" 

B.  and  F.  (Walker). 

"  We'll  leave  |  and  think  |  it  is  |  her///  I  asiire."—Ib. 
"  But  'tis  |  my  lord  |  th'  Assist  |  ant's  pit  \  astlre."—Ib. 
"  He  dare  |  not  see  |  you.     A't  |  his///  |  asrire."—Ib. 
"You  shall  |  have  ransom.  |  Let  me  |  have  stir  \geons." 

Lear,  iv.  6.  196. 
"  If  on  I  ly  to  go  r  (484)  warm  |  were^r^  |  eons." 

Ib.  ii.  4.  271. 
"Your  mind  I  is  toss  |  ing  on  |  the  6  \  cedn." 

M.  of  V.  i.  I.  8  ;  Hen.   V.  iii.  I.  14. 

"The  new  |  est  state.  |  This  is  |  the  ser  \gednt." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  3. 

Similarly     "  But    they  |  did    say  |  their  prdy  \  ers   and  |  address'd 

them."— Ib.  ii.  2.  25;  Coriol.  v.  3.  105. 
"  Hath  tvirn'd  |  my  feign  |  ed  prdy  \  er  on  |  my  head." 

Rich.  III.  v.  i.  21,  ii.  2.  14. 

Even  where  "prayer"  presents  the  appearance  of  a  monosyllable, 
the  second  syllable  was  probably  slightly  sounded. 
For  i  and  e  sonant  in  "  -led,"  see  474- 

B  B 


370  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

479  a.  Monosyllabic  feet  in  Chaucer.     Mr.  Skeat  (Essay  on 

Metres  of  Chaucer,  Aldine  Edition,  1866)  has  shown  that  Chaucer 
often  uses  a  monosyllabic  foot,  but  the  instances  that  have  been 
pointed  out  are  restricted  to  the  first  foot. 

"May,  |  with  all  thyn  floures  and  thy  greene." — C.  T.  1512. 

"  Til  |  that  deeth  departe  schal  us  twayne." — Ib.  1137. 

"  Ther  \  by  aventure  this  Palamon." — Ib.  1518. 

"  Now  \  it  schyneth,  now  it  reyneth  fast." — Ib.  1537. 

"  Al  |  by-smoterud  with  his  haburgeon." — Ib.  77. 
It  will  be  shown  in  paragraphs  480-6  that  Shakespeare  uses  this 
licence  more  freely,  but  not  without  the  restrictions  of  certain  natural 
laws. 

480.  Fear,  dear,  fire,  hour,  your,  four,  and  other  mono- 
syllables ending  in  r  or  re,  preceded  by  a  long  vowel  or 

diphthong,  are  frequently  pronounced  as  dissyllables.  Thus 
"fire"  was  often  spelt  and  is  still  vulgarly  pronounced  "fier."  So 
"fare"  seems  to  have  been  pronounced  "fa-er;"  "ere,"  "e-er;" 
"there,"  "the-er,"  &c. 

It  is  often  emphasis,  and  the  absence  of  emphasis,  that  cause  this 
licence  of  prolongation  to  be  adopted  and  rejected  in  the  same  line  : 
Fair.—11  Ferd.  Or  night  |  kept  chain'd  |  below.  | 

Prosp.  Fdir  \  ly  spoke." 

Tempest,  iv.  I.  31. 

(or  perhaps  (484)  "below.  |  *  Fair  |  ly  spoke.") 
Fare.— "  Poison'd,  |  ill  fd  \  re,  dead,  |  forsook,  |  cast  off." 

K.  J.  v.  7.  35. 
"Loath  to  |  bid  fd  \  mvell,  |  we  take  |  our  leaves." 

P.  of  T.  ii.  5.  13. 
"Lucius,  |  my  gown.  |    Fare  \  well,  good  |  Messala." 

J.  C.  iv.  3.  231. 
"Died  ev  |  ery  day  |  she  liv'd  (Fol.).  |  Fare  \  thee  well." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  111. 
"Fdre  \  well,  kins  |  man  !     I'  |  will  talk  |  with  you." 

I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  234. 
"For   worms,  |  brave    Per  |  cy.     Fd  \  reweti    (so    Folio),  | 

great  heart."— Ib.  v.  4.  87. 
"Why  then  |  I  wl  \  #(483).     Fd  \  re\vc\\,  \  old  Gaunt." 

Rich.  II.  i.  2.  44. 

So  J.  C.  iv.  3.  231 ;  i  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  Ill  (Folio) ;  M.  W.  of  W. 
iii.  4-  97  ;  K.  J.  iii.  2.  17.  (See  475.) 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  371 

Ere.— "For  I'  |  intend  |  to  have  |  it  cr  \  e  (e-er)  long." 

i  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  80. 

I  should  prefer  to  prolong  the  emphatic  here,  rather  than  "our,"  in 

"What  should  |  be  spok  |  en/*/|  re  (he-er)  where  |  our  fate." 

Micbe'h,  ii.  3.  128. 
Mere. — The  pause  after  "night "  enables  us  to  scan  thus  : 

"They    have    trav  |  ell'd   all  |  the   night   (484).  |  ^Me  \  re 

fetches."— Lear,  ii.  4.  90. 
There.— "Hath  death  |  lain  with  |  thy  wife.  |  There  \  she  lies," 

R.  and  J.  iv.  5.  36. 

"Towards  Calais  ;  |  now  grant  |  him  the  \  re,  tht  \  re  seen." 

Hen.  V.  v.  Prol.  7. 

(I  have  not  found  a  Shakespearian  instance  of  "  Calais."     Other- 
wise at  first  sight  it  is  natural  to  scan  "  Towards  |  Calais.") 

"  Exe.  Like  mu  |  sic. 
Cant.  Tht  \  ref6re  \  doth  heav'n  |  divide." 

//<•//.  V.  i.  2.  183. 
Where. — "I  know  I  a  bank,  I  where  \  the  wild  I  thyme  blows." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  249. 
"Hor.    Where,  \  my  lord  ?  | 
Ham.  I'n  my  |  mind's  ey'e,  |  Horatio." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  185. 
(But  Folio  inserts  "Oh"  before  "where.") 

Rarely.— "I 's  not  |  this  buck  |  led  well?  |  Rare  \  ly,  rarely." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  4.  11. 

r   (The  first  "  rarely"  is  the  more  emphatic  :  or?  (483),  "  well."  ) 
Dear. — "As  done  :  |  persev  |  erance,  |  dear  \  my  lord." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  150. 
" Dtar  \  my  lord,  |  if  you,  |  in  your  |  own  proof." 

M.  Ado,  iv.  i.  46. 
"  The    king  |  would    speak  |  with    Cornwall :  |  the    di  \  ar 

father." — Lear,  ii.  4.  102. 
"  Oliv.  Than  mu  |  sic  from  |  the  spht  \  res. 

Viol.  Z>/|arlady." 

T.  N.  iii.  i.  1-1. 
Fear.—"F<!ar  \  me  not,  |  withdraw,  |  I  hear  |  him  coming." 

Hamlet,  iii.  4.  7. 
Hear.— "Hear,  Na  |  ture,  he\  ar,  de\  ar  God  |  dess,  hear." 

Lear,  i.  4.  297. 
(The  emphasis  increases  as  the  verse  proceeds. ) 

Near. — "Near,  \  why  then  I  anoth  I  er  time  |  I'll  hear  it." 

T.  of  A.  i.  2.  184. 

B   B   2 


372  SHAKESPEARIAN-  GRAMMAR. 

Tears.— "  Au/.  Name  not  |  the  God,  [  thou  boy  |  of  ti\  ars. 

Coriol.  Ha  !" 

Coriol.  v.  6.  101. 
"  Tear  |  for  tear,  |  and  lov  |  ing  kiss  |  for  lu'ss." 

T.  A.  v.  3.  156. 

Year. — "Twelve  yf\  ar  since,  |  Miran  |  da,  twelve  |  year  since." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  53. 

(The  repeated  "year"  is  less  emphatic  than  the  former.) 
And,  perhaps,  if  the  line  be  pronounced  deliberately, 

"Many  |  years  |  of  hap  |  py  days  |  befal."— Rich. II.  i.  1.21. 
It  might  be  possible  to  scan  as  follows  : 

"  Well  struck  |  in  y£  \  ars,  fa  \  ir  and  |  not  jealous." 

Rich.  III.  i.  i.  92. 

But  the  Folio  has  "jealious,"  and  the  word  is  often  thus  written 
(Walker)  and  pronounced  by  Elizabethan  authors. 
Their  (?).—  If  the  text  be  correct,  in 

"  The  commons  hath  he  pill'd  with  grievous  taxes, 
And  quite  lost  |  their  hearts.  |  The  no  |  bles  hath  |  he  fin'd 
For    an  |  cient   quarrels   (463),  |  and   quite  |  lost   the  \  ir 
hearts,"— Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  247-8. 

it  is  almost  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  second  their  is   more 
emphatic  than  the  first.      Else  the  repetition  is  intolerable.     See 
475,  476.     But  even  with  this  scansion  the  harshness  is  so  great  as 
to  render  it  probable  that  the  text  is  corrupt 
Hire. — "A  ship  |  you  sent  |  me  for  |  to  hi  \  re  -wattage" 

€.  of  E.  iv.  i.  95. 
Sire.  —  "And  is  |  not  like  |  the  si  \  re:   hon  |  ours  thrive." 

A.   W.  ii.  3.  142. 
Door.—11  And  with  |  my  sword  |  I'll  keep  |  this  d6  \  or  safe." 

T.  A.\.\.  288. 
More.— "If  more,  |  the  m6  \  re  hast  |  thou  wrongM  |  (ed)  me." 

Lear,  v.  3.  168. 
(The  second  "more"  is  the  more  emphatic.) 

"  As  may  |  compact  |  it  m6  \  re.     Get  |  you  gone." 

Ib.  i.  4.  362. 
"  Who  hadst  |  deserv  |  ed  m6  \  re  than  |  a  prison." 

Temp.  i.  2.  362. 

Our  (perhaps).— "To  list  |  en  6u  \  rpiir  |  pose.     This  is (461)  |  thy 
office."—^/.  Ado,  iii.  i.  12. 

("  This  is"  is  a  quasi -monosyllable.      See  461.) 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  373 

"And  by  |  me,  had  |  not  6u  \  r  hap  ]  been  bad." 

C.  of  E.  i.  i.  39. 

"First  Sett.   Which  we  |  devise  |  him. 
Corn.  Ou  \  r  spoils  |  he  kick'd  at." 

Coriol.  ii,  2.  128. 
"  First  "  requires  emphasis  in 
"  Sic.   In  6u  |  r  first  |  way. 
Men.  I'  |  '11  bring  |  him  to  you. 

IP.  iii.  i.  334. 

Hour  (often). — "  A't  the  |  sixth  hou  |  r,  at  |  which  time  |  my  lord." 

Tempest,  v.  I.  4. 

Your. —  "And  so,  I  though  you  \  rs,  not  I  yours* — prove  I  it  so." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  20. 
" Lart.  My  horse  |  to  you  \  rs,  no!  | 
Mart.  Tis  done !  | 

Lart.  Agreed." 

Coriol.  i.  4.  2. 
"And  pun  I  ish  them  I  to  yoii  \  r  height  I  of  pleasure." 

M.  for  M.  v.  i.  240. 
Unless  "pleasure"  is  a  trisyllable.     (See  479.) 

"  Is  he  pard  |  on'd  and  |  for^w  |  r  love  |  ly  sake." — Ib.  499. 
There  is  an  emphatic  antithesis  in 

"Who  is  |  lost  too.  |  Take  y6u  \  r  pa  |  tience  t6  you, 

And  /'//  say  nothing."—  W.  T.  iii.  2.  232. 
"And  shall  I  have  y6u  \  r  will,  I  because  |  our  king." 

3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  17. 

481.  Monosyllables  which  are  emphatic  either  (i)  from  their 
meaning,  as  in  the  case  of  exclamations,  or  (2)  from  their  use  in 
antithetical  sentences,  or  (3)  which  contain  diphthongs,  or  (4)  vowels 
preceding  r,  often  take  the  place  of  a  whole  foot.  This  is  less 
frequent  in  dissyllabic  words.  In  (i)  and  (2)  as  well  as  (3)  the  mono- 
syllables often  contain  diphthongs,  or  else  long  vowels. 

In  many  cases  it  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  determine 
whether  a  monosyllable  should  be  prolonged  or  not.  Thus,  in 

"  On  this  |  unworth  |  y  scaff  |  old  t6  \  bring  forth," 

Hen.   V.  Prologue,  10. 

many  may  prefer  to  scan  "  |  -old  to  bri  \  ng  forth"  and  to  prolong 
the  following  monosyllable  rather  than  to  accent  "to  ;"  and  in 

"  Came  pour  I  ing  like  I  the  tide  \  int6  \  a  breach," 

Hen.    V.  i.  2.  149. 
*  It  is  a  matter  of  taste  which  yours  should  receive  the  emphasis. 


374  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

it  is  possible  to  prolong  the  preceding  monosyllable,  "the//|  de 
in  |  to  a  breach."  Such  cases  may  often  be  left  to  the  taste  of  the 
rea  ler  (but  for  the  accent  of  "  into  "  see  4570).  All  that  can  safely 
be  said  is,  that  when  a  very  unemphatic  monosyllable,  as  "at," 
"  and,"  "a,"  "the,"  &c.  has  the  accent,  it  is  generally  preceded  or 
followed  by  a  very  strongly  accented  monosyllable,  as 

"  Assume  the  port  of  Mars  ;  and  at  his  heels." 

Hen.  V.  Prologue,  6. 

It  is  equally  a  matter  of  taste  whether  part  of  the  prolonged 
monosyllable  should  be  considered  to  run  on  into  the  following  foot, 
or  whether  a  pause  be  supposed  after  the  monosyllable,  as 

"Girding  |  with  griev  |  ous  siege  \  castles  [  and  towns." 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  152. 
"  As  kndts  |  by  the  |  conflux  |  of  meet  |  ing  sap." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  7. 

482,  Monosyllabic  exclamations, 

Ay. — "  Polon.  Wherefore  |  should  you  |  do  this?  | 

Reg.  A'y,  |  my  lord?" 

Hamlet,  ii.  I.  36. 

"  King.   Will  you  |  be  ruled  |  by  me  ?  | 
Laert.  A'y,  \  my  lord." 

Ib.  iv.  7.  60. 
"  A'y,  |  what  else?  |    And  but  |  I  be  j  deceiv'd." 

T.  ofSh.  iv.  4.  2. 
•"  Vol.  That  brought  |  thee  to  |  this  world.  | 

Vir.  A'y,  \  and  mine." 

Coriol.  v.  3.  125. 
'"  Corn.  I's  he  |  pursii  |  ed  (474)? 

Clou.  A'  \y,  my  |  good  lord." 

Lear,  ii.  I.  111. 
Nay.— "  What  says  [  he?    Nd  \  y,  no  |  thing ;  all  |  is  said." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  i.  148. 
"  Cor.   How,  trai  |  tor  ! 

Com.  Nd  |  y,  tern  |  p(e)rately  ;  |  your  promise." 

Coriol.  iii.  3.  67. 
Slay.— "  Stdy,  \  the  king  |  hath  thrown  |  his  ward  |  er  down." 

Ib.  i.  3.  118. 
Yea. — "  Yfa,  I  my  lord.  |    How  brooks  |  your  grace  |  the  air?" 

Ib.  iii.  2.  2. 
//ail.—"  'Gainst  m^  |  captiv  |  ity.  |    Hdilt  \  brave  friend." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  5. 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS,  375 

0.—"  Cass.    Cf,  |  'tis  true.  | 

licet.  Ho  !   bid  |  my  trum  |  pet  sound." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  v.  3.  13. 
"  Cleo.        (?,  |  'tis  trea  |  son. 

Charm.  Madam,  |  I  trust  |  not  so." 

A.  and  C.  i.  5.  7. 
"  To  hide  |  the  slain.  |   0*,  |  from  this  |  time  forth." 

Hamlet,  iv.  4.  65. 
"  Mir,   O*,  |  good  sir,  |  I  do.  | 
Prosp.  I  pray  |  thee,  mark  me." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  80. 

Perhaps  "Pol.  The  devil  |  himself.  | 

AV;/y.  #*,  |  'tis  (it  is)  |  too- true." 

Ib.  iii.  i.  49. 
"  Self  a  I  gainst  self.  I    0*,  I  prepos  I  terous." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  63. 
"  Their  clea  |  rer  rea  |  son.     O1*,  |  v  good  |  Gonzalo." 

Temp.  v.  i.  68. 

I  have  not  found  "  reason"  a  trisyllable  in  Shakespeare. 

"  0*,  |  my  follies  !  |   Then  E'd  |  gar  was  |  abused." 

Lear,  iii.  7.  91. 
"  Cf,  |  the  diff  |  erence  |  of  man  |  and  man." 

Ib.  iv.  2.  26. 
?  "  The  heart  |  of  wo  |  man  is.  |    O*,  |  (453)  Brutus." 

J.  C.  ii.  4.  40. 
"Struck  Cae'  |  sar  on  |  the  neck.  |    0*,  |  you  flatterers." 

Ib.  v.  i.  44. 
Soft. — "  But  s6  \ft!  com  |  pany  |  is  com  |  ing  here." 

T.  ofSh.  iv.  5-26. 
Come. — "  C6me,  \  good  fell  |  ow,  put  |  mine  ir  |  on  on." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  4.  3. 
What.—"  Where  be  I  these  knaves?  I   What,  \  no  man  |  at  door  !" 

T.  ofSh.  iv.  I.  125. 
"  What,  I  unjust !  I    Be  not  I  so  hot  :  I  the  duke." 

M.forM.  v.  1.315. 
Well. — "  Well,  I  give  her  I  that  ring,  I  and  there  |  withal." 

T.  G.  of  F.  iv.  4.  89. 
"  Con.   Remem  I  ber  what  I  I  tell  I  you. 
Osw.  We  |  //,  madam." 

Lear,  i.  3.  21. 

483,  Monosyllables   emphasized  by  position  or  anti- 
thesis,    A  conjunction  like  "  yet"  or  "  but,"  implying  hesitation, 


376  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

may  naturally  require  a  pause  immediately  after  it  ;  and  this  pause 
may  excuse  the  absence  of  an  unaccented  syllable,  additional  stress 
being  laid  on  the  monosyllable. 

But.—11  Of  good  |  ly  thous  |  ands.     Bu  \  t,  for  |  all  this." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  44. 
"  The  Gods  I  rebuke  I  me  hi  \  t  it  |  is  tidings." 

A.  and  C.v.  I.  27. 
Yet. — "  Though  I  |  condemn  |  not,  ye"  \  t,  un  |  der  pardon." 

Lear,  i.  4.  365. 
"  Yet  (as  yet),  |  I  think,  |  we  are  |  not  brought  |  so  low." 

T.  A.  iii.  2.  76. 
"  Brut.   When  Cae's  |  ar's  he'ad  |  is  off.  | 

Cass.  Yet  \  I  fear  him." 

J.  C.  ii.  I.  183. 

Pronouns  emphasized  by  antithesis  or  otherwise,  sometimes  dis- 
pense with  the  unaccented  syllable. 

"Show  |  men  dii  |  tifvil? 

Why,  so  I  didst  th6  \  u.   Seem  |  they  grave  |  and  learned? 
Why,  so  I  didst  thou."— Hen.  K  ii.  z.  128. 
(Possibly,  however,  "seem"  may  be  prolonged  instead  of  "thou.") 

"  When  you  |  shall  please  |  to  play  |  the  thieves  |  for  wives. 
I'll  watch  |  as  16ng  |  for  y6  \  u  then.  |    Approach." 

M.  of  F.  ii.  6.  24. 
"  Were  y6  \  u  in  |  my  stead,  |  would  you  |  have  heard  ?" 

Corlol.  v.  3.  192. 
You  is  emphatic  from  Desdemona  to  Othello  in 

"      Othello.  'Tis  a  |  good  hand, 

A  frank  |  one. 

Desd.  Y6  \  u  may  |  indeed  |  say  so." 

Othello,  iii.  4.  44. 
So  in  "How  in  |  my  strength  |  you  please.  |  For y6  \  u,  E'dmund." 

Lear,  ii.  I.  114. 
and  in  the  retort  of  Brutus  on  Cassius, 

"  L&  me  |  te\\y6  \  u,  Cass  |  ius,  you  |  yourself 
Are  much  |  condemn'd  |  to  have  |  an  itch  |  ing  palm. " 

7  C.  iv.  3.  9. 

Perhaps  aware  of  Ferdinand's  comment  on  his  emotion,  "your 
father's  in  some  passion,"  Prospero  turns  to  Ferdinand  and  says, 
"  it  is  you  who  are  moved"  in 

"  Yo'u  |  do  look,  |  my  son,  |  in  a  |  mov'd  sort." 

Temp.  iv.  I.  146. 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  377 

Otherwise  the  reading  of  the  line  so  as  to  avoid  accenting  "my" 
seems  difficult. 

There  is  no  prolongation,  though  there  is  antithetical  emphasis,  in 

"  Look  up  |  on  him,  \  love  him,  |  he  wor  |  ships  you." 

A.  Y.  L.  v.  2.  88. 
The  repeated  "thence"  seems  to  require  a  pause  in 

"  Thence  to  |  a  watch,  |  thtnce  \  into  (45 la)  \  a  weakness." 

Hamlet,  ii.  I.  148. 

But  possibly,  like  "  ord(i)nance,"  "  lightening "  (see  477),  so 
"  weakness  "  may  be  pronounced  a  trisyllable. 

484,  Monosyllables   containing  diphthongs  and  long 

Vowels,  since  they  naturally  allow  the  voice  to  rest  upon  them,  are 
often  so  emphasized  as  to  dispense  with  an  unaccented  syllable. 
When  the  monosyllables  are  imperatives  of  verbs,  as  "speak,"  or 
nouns  used  imperatively,  like  "peace,"  the  pause  which  they  require 
after  them  renders  them  peculiarly  liable  to  be  thus  emphasized. 
Whether  the  word  is  dissyllabized,  or  merely  requires  a  pause  after  it, 
cannot  in  all  cases  be  determined.  In  the  following  examples  the 
scansion  is  marked  throughout  on  the  former  supposition,  but  it  is 
not  intended  to  be  represented  as  necessary. 

A  (long).    "Just  as  |  you  left  |  them,  d  \  II  pris  |  'ners,  sir." 

Temp.  v.  I.  8. 
"Try  man  |  y,  d  \  II  good,  |  serve  trii  |  ly  never." 

Cymb.  iv.  2.  373. 
"Yea,  look'st  |  thou  pd  \  le?    Let  |  me  see  |  the  writing." 

Rich.  II.  v.  2.  57. 
"Duke.   Like  the  |  old  d  \ge. 
Clown.  A're  |  you  read  |  y,  sir?" 

T.  N.  ii.  4.  50. 

"Yea,  his  |  dread  tri  |  dent  shake.  |    My  brd  \  ve  spirit." 

Temp.  i.  2.  206. 

At.        "  'Gainst  my  |  captiv  |  ity".  |    Hail,  \  brave  friend." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  5. 

"  I'll  be  |  with  (wi')  you  strdi  \  ght.     Go  |  a  little  |  before." 

Hamlet,  iv.  4.  31. 

I  should  prefer  to  avoid  laying  an  accent  on  "  the  "  in 

"  To  fa  \  il  in  the  |  dispos  |  ing  of  |  these  chances." 

Coriol.  iv.  7.  40. 

"Which  is  |  most/a  \  inf.     Now  |  'tis  true 
I  must  |  be  here  |  confin'd  |  by  you." — Temp.  Epilogue,  3. 


378  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Ay        "  Say  I  again,  I  where  didst  I  thou  leave  |  these  varlets?" 

Temp.  iv.  I.  170. 
So  in  the  dissyllable  "  payment." 

"  He  hiimb  I  ly  prays  I  you  speed  |  y  pdy  \  mint" 

T.  of  A.  ii.  2.  28. 
Perhaps 

"  What  sd  \y  you,  |  my  lord?  |    Are  you  |  content." 

i  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  70. 
Perhaps 
E.         "Senators.    We\  '11  sure  |  ty  him. 

Com.  A'g  |  ed  sir,  |  hands  off." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  178. 

"  Men.  The  con  |  sul  Cori  j  olan  |  us 

Bru.  He  \  v  consul  \"—Ib.  iii.  i.  280. 

Ea.       "  Peace.  \  I  say.  I    Good  e  I  ven  to  I  you,  friend." 

A.   Y.  L.  ii.  3.  70. 
"  Anton  |  ius  dt  \  ad!    I'f  |  thou  say  |  so,  villain." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  26. 
"  Doct.     But,  though  |  slow,  de  \  adly.  \ 

Queen.  I  won  |  der,  doctor." 

Cymb.  i.  5.  10. 

"  Why"  dost  |  not  speak?  |   What,  de  \  of:  not  |  a  word?" 

T.  A.  v.  i.  46. 
"  Sptak,  |  Lavin  |  ia,  what  |  accurs  |  ed  hand?" 

Ib.  iii.  i.  66. 

"  Which  was  |  to///  |  ase.     Now  |  I  want 
Spirits  to  |  enforce,  |  not  to  |  enchant." 

Temp.  Epilogue,  13. 

"Earth's  in  |  crease,  \  foison  |  plenty, 

Barns  and  |  garners  |  never  |  empty." — Ib.  iv.   I.  110. 

Perhaps  "  Glou.   Alack,  |  the  night  |  comes  on,  |  and  the  (457) 
bit  |  ak  winds."— Lear,  ii.  4.  303. 

Perhaps  "Truly  |  to  spt  \  ak,  and  |  with  no  |  addition," 

Hamlet,  iv.  4.  17. 
or    "Truly  |  to  speak,  |  and  with  no  |  addit  |  ion." 

"  Be  free  |  and  he  \  althftil.  \    So  tart  |  a  favour." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  5.  38. 
"  The  safety  and  health  of  this  whole  state," 

Hamlet,  i.  3.  21. 

could  not  be  scanned  without  prolonging  both  "health"  and 
"whole."  Such  a  double  prolongation  is  extremely  improbable, 
considering  the  moderate  emphasis  required.  More  probably 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  379 

"sanity"  should  be  read,  as  has  been  suggested,  for  "sanctity," 
the  reading  of  the  Folio. 

Ee.       "Forward,  |  not  per  |  manent,  |  sweet,  \  not  lasting." 

Hamlet,  i.  3.  8. 

"  Seek  I  me  out,  I  and  that  |  way  I'  |  am  wife  in." 

Hen.  VI I L  iii.  I.  39. 

"  The  curt  |  ain'd  sit  \  ep  witch  |  craft  eel  |  ebra'tes." 

Macbeth,  ii.  I.  51. 

"  Doth  com  |  fort  thee  in  |  thy  sll  \  ep ;  live,  |  and  flourish." 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  130. 
"  This  ig  |  norant  pres  |  ent  and  |  I  ft  \  el  now." 

Ib.  i.  5.  58. 
"  Enough  |  to  fetch  |  him  in.  |    See  \  it  done." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  I.  14. 
"  Yet  but  |  thrte.  \    Come  one  |  more, 
Two  of  I  both  kinds  I  make  up  I  four." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  437. 
"  When  stt  \  el  grows  |  soft  as  |  the  para  |  site's  silk." 

Coriol.  i.  9.  45. 

"Soft"  is  emphasized  as  an  exclamation  (566481),  but  perhaps 
on  the  whole  it  is  better  to  emphasize  "  steel  "  here. 

"  Ferd.  Makes  this  |  place  Par  |  adise. 
"  Prosp.  S-w&ct  |  now,  silence." 

Temp.  iv.  I.  124. 

Eo.     The  eo  in  the  foreign-derived  word  "leopard"  stands  on   a 
different  footing  : 

"Or  horse  I  or  ox  I  en  from  |  the  U  \  opdrd." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  5.  31. 
So,  often,  in  Elizabethan  authors. 

/.          "  Men  for  I  their  wl  \  ves :  wl  \  ves  for  |  their  husbands." 

3  Hen.  VI.  v.  6.  41. 
"Of  great  1  est  just  I  ice.     Wri  \  te,  write,  I  Rinaldo." 

A.  IV.  iii.  4.  29. 
"Horri  I  ble  si  \  ghtl    Now  I  I  see  I  'tis  true." 

Macbeth,  iv.  i.  122. 
"  Full  fif  I  teen  hundred,  I  best  \  des  com  j  mon  men." 

Hen.   V.  iv.  8.  84. 

I  know  of  no  instance  where  "hundred,"  like  (477)  "Henry," 
receives  two  accents.  Else  the  "be-"  in  "  besides  "  might  (460)  be 
dropped,  and  the  verse  might  be  differently  scanned. 


380  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR, 

"  Each  man's  |  like  mi  \  ne:  you  ]  have  shewn  |  all  Hectors." 

A.  and  C.  iv.  8.  7. 
"At  a  poor  |  man's  house  :  |  he  us'd  |  me  ki  \  ndly." 

Coriol.  i.  9.  83.     But  see  477. 

le.        Possibly  "friends"   may  require   to  be   emphasized,    as  its 
position  is  certainly  emphatic,  in 

"Till  death  |  unloads  |  thee.     Frl  \  ends  hast  |  thou  none." 

M.forM.  iii.  I.  28. 
"No,  say'st  |  me  so,  \frietid?  \  What  coun  |  tryman?" 

T.  of  Sh.  i.  2.  190. 
"Yield,  my  lord,  |  protect  |  or  yi  \  eld,  Win  |  Chester." 

I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  i.  112. 
("My"  is  dropped,  497.) 

"  Mort  de  |  ma  vi  \  el     I'f  |  they  ride  |  along." 

Hen.  V.  iii.  5.  11. 

0.  "Drive  him  |  to  RS  \  me:  'tis  (it  |  is)  time  |  we  twain." 

A.  and  C.  i.  4.  73. 
"  Card.  R6me  \  shall  reme  J  dy  this.  | 
Glou.  Roamthi  |  ther,  then." 

I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  i.  51. 
"While  he  |  himself  |  keeps  in  |  the  c6  \  Id  field." 

3  Hen.  VI.  iv.  3.  14. 
"Toad  that  |  under  |  cold  \  stone 

Days  and  |  nights  has  |  thirty  |  one. "— Macbeth,  iv.  I.  6. 
So  scan  "  Go  t6  the  |  creating  [  a  ivh6  \  le  tribe  |  of  fops." 

Lear,  i.  2.  14. 
Oa.       "  Is  g6  |  ads,  th6  \  rns  (485),  net  |  ties,  tails  |  of  wasps." 

W.  T.  i.  2.  329. 

01.  "JSint  |  by  joint,  |  but  we  |  will  know  |  his  purpose." 

M.forM.  v.  I.  314. 
"What  wheels,  |  racks,  fires?  |  What  flay  |  ing,  b6  \  illng?" 

W.  T.  iii.  2.  177. 
"God  save  |  you,  sir.  |  Where  have  you  |  been  br6  \  illng?" 

Hen.  VIII.  iv.  I.  56. 
"Of  their  |  own  ch6  \  ice:  one  |  is  Jiin  |  ius  Brutus." 

Coriol.  i.  I.  220. 
"  What  say  |  you,  bd  \  ys  ?     Will  |  you  bide  |  with  him?" 

T.  A.  v.  2.  13. 
Oo.        "Than  in  |  my  thought  |  it  lies.  |  G6od  \  my  lord." 

A.  W.  v.  3.  184. 

It  might  be  thought  that  in  the  above  the  prolongation  rests  on 
lies  (lieth),  but  that  we  have  also 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  381 

"  G6od  |  my  lord,  |  give  me  |  thy  fav  |  our  still." 

Temp.  iv.  i.  204. 
"The  g&  |  od  gods  |  will  mock  |  me  pres  |  ently." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  4.  15. 
"He  straight  |  declin  |  ed,  dr6  \  op'd,  took  |  it  deeply." 

W.  T.  ii.  3.  14. 
"To  it,  |  boy !    Mar  |  cus,  16  \  ose  when  |  I  bid." 

T.  A.  iv.  3.  58. 
"Hours,  min  I  utes,  n6  \  on,  mid  I  night,  and  I  all  etfes." 

W.  T.  i.  2.  290. 
"But  r6  I  om,  fai  |  ry,  here  |  comes  O'b  |  eron." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  58. 
" B6ot  |  less  home  |  and  weath  |  er-beat  |  en  back." 

i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  i.  67. 
"  Pull  off  |  my  b6  \  ot:  hard  |  er,  hard  |  er,  so." 

Lear,  iv.  6.  177. 
"  But  mt  |  ody  \  and  dti  \  II  mel  |  ancholy." 

C.  ofE.  v.  i.  79. 

Some  may  prefer  to  read    "dull"  as  a  monosyllable;  but  I  can 
find  no  instance  of  "melancholy1 "  to  justify  such  a  scansion. 

In     "  Lear.  To  this  j  detest  |  ed^  |  om. 

Gon.  A't  |  your  choice,  sir,' 

Lear,  ii.  4.  220. 

either  "  groom  "  or  "your  "  should  be  dissyllabized. 

"  I'  do  j  wander  |  every  |  where 

Swifter  |  than  the  |  mfon's  \  sphere." — M.  N.  D.  ii.  i.  7. 
Ou.       "Which  else  |  would  free  I  have  -ivr6  \  ught.    A'll  |  is  well." 

Macbeth,  ii.  i.  19. 
In     "Should  drink  |  his  blood —  |  mSunts  |  up  to  |  the  air." 

MARLOW,  Ed-w.  II. 

Collier    (Hist,  of  British   Stage,   vol.  iii.)  thinks   "mounts"    the 
emphatic  word  to  be  dwelt  on  for  the  length  of  a  dissyllable. 
Ow.     "Own"  is  perhaps  emphasized  by  repetition  (or  "Are"  is  a 
dissyllable,  as  "fare,"  "ere,"  "where,"  480)  in 

"  If  el.  Mine  own  |  and  not  |  mine  6  \  wn. 
Dem.  A're  |  you  sure?" 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  189. 

Oy.      The  last  syllable  of  "  destroy  "  seems  prolonged  in 

"To  fright  |  them  ere  |  destr6  \  y.     But  |  come  in." 

Coriol.  iv.  5.  149. 


382  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

U.     It  may  be  that  "fume"  is  emphasized  in 

"She's  tick  |  led  n6w.  |  Her_/w  |  me  needs  |  no  spurs." 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  153. 

(Unless  "needs"  is  prolonged  either  by  reason  of  the  double  vowel 
or  because  "needs"  is  to  be  pronounced  "needeth.") 

"  Trrie  |  nobil  |  ity  is  |  exempt  |  from  fear." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  i.  129. 

Titania  speaks  in  verse  throughout,  and  therefore  either  "and" 
must  be  accented  and  "hoard"  prolonged,  or  we  must  scan  as 
follows  : 

"  The  squir  |  rel's  hoard,  |  and  fetch  |  thee  new  \  x  nuts." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  40. 

"  Cord.  That  wants  |  the  means  |  to  lead  it.  | 
Mess.  Neivs,  \  madam." 

Lear,  iv.  4.  20. 

485.  Monosyllables  containing  a  vowel  followed  by  "r  " 

are  often  prolonged. 

A.         "  Thyr.  Hear  it  |  apdr  \  t. 

Cleo.  None  |  but  friends:  |  say  boldly." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  47. 
"Ho  |  ly  seems  |  the  quarrel 
Upon  |  his  gra  |  ce'spd  |  rt ;  black  |  and  fearful 

c\i*  4."U«  I   A«M/   I   ««—  ??         A     jxr   in     -     cr 


C/n  the  |  oppo  |  ser."— A.  W.  iii.  i.  5. 

"  Well  fitt(ed)  |  in  d  \  rts,  glo  |  rious  |  in  arms." 

L.  L.  L.  ii.  i.  45. 
"Strikes  his  |  breast  hd  \  rd,  and  |  anon  |  he  casts." 

Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  117. 
"  But  could  |  be  willing  |  to  md  \  rch  on  |  to  Calais." 

Hen.   V.  iii.  6.  150. 
"Hark  |  ye,  lords,  |  ye  see  |  I  have  given  |  her  physic." 

T.  A.  iv.  2.  162, 
"Look  how  |  he  makes  |  to  Coe's  |  ar,  mdr  \  k  him." 

J.  C.  iii.  2.  18. 
Ei.       "  I  dreamt  |  last  night  |  of  the  |  three  we  \  ird  sisters." 

Macbeth,  ii.  i.  20  (Folio,  "  weyard"). 
"  A'nd  be  |  times  I'  |  will  to  |  the  we1  \  ird  sisters." 

Ib.  iii.  4.  133,  iv.  I.  136. 

Or  "  will "  is  perhaps  emphasized  and  the  prefix  hi  "  betimes  " 
ignored.     In  either  case  "  weird"  is  a  dissyllable. 

"  The  wt  |  ird  sis  |  ters  hand  |  in  hand."— Macbeth,  i.  3.  32. 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  383 

/.          "A  thi  I  rd  thinks  |  without  |  expense  |  at  all." 

1  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  76. 
"Of  Lion  |  el  duke  |  of  Clarence,  |  the  thi  \  rd  son." 

Ib.  ii.  5.  75. 

"To  king  |  Edward  |  the  thi  \  rd,  where  |  as  he." — Ib.  76. 
0.         "Bru.   Spread  fur  |  ther  (478). 

Men.  One  w6  \  rd  more,  |  one  word." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  311. 
"Make   the  |  prize  light.    |     One  w6r  \  d  more,  |  I  charge 

thee."—  Temp.  i.  2.  452. 
"Ham.  One  w6r  \  </more,  I  good  lady.  I 
Queen.  What  shall  |  I  do  ?" 

Hamlet,  iii.  4.  180. 
"  Do  more  |  than  this  |  in  sp6  \  rt ;  fa  |  ther,  father  !  " 

Lear,  ii.  i.  37. 
"  W6rse  \  and  worse  !  |  She  will  |  not  come  !  |  O,  vile!" 

T.  of  Sh.  v.  2.  93. 
"Not  in  |  the  iv6  \  rst  rank  |  of  man  |  hood,  sa/t." 

Macbeth,  iii.  I.  103. 
"Why  so,  |  brave  16  \  rds,  when  |  we  join  |  in  league." 

T.  A.  iv.  2.  136. 
"My  16  I  rd,  will  I  it  please  I  you  pass  I  along." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  i.  110. 
"Of  good  |  old  A'  |  braham.  |    L6rds  \  appellants." 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  104. 
("  A'ppellants  "  is  not  Shakespearian.) 

"But  tell  |  me,  is  |  young   Ge6r  \  ge  Stan  |  ley  living?" 

Ib.  v.  5.  9. 
or,  possibly, 

"  But  tell  me,  | 
Is  young  |  George  Stan  |  ley  living  ?  " 

On.       "  Henry  doth  claim  the  crown  from  John  of  Gaunt, 

The /<*«  I  rth  son  :  I  York  claims  I  it  from  I  the  third." 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  2.  55. 
So,  perhaps, 

"And  long  |  live  Hen  |  ry  f6u  \  rth  of  |  that  name." 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  112. 

("  Four"  was  often  spelt  "fower."       "  Henry"  is  not  pronounced 
"  Hen(e)ry  "  in  Richard  II. ) 

"  Heart,"  not  "you,"  ought  to  be  emphatic  in 

"  Not  by  |  the  mat  |  ter  which  |  your  hear  \  t  prompts  you." 

Coriol.  iii.  2.  54. 


384  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Probably  we  ought  to  arrange  the  difficult  line,  Macbeth,  iv.  I. 
105,  thus  : 

"  A'nd  an  |  etern  |  al  cu  \  rse  fall  j  on  you. 
Let  me  know. 
Why  sinks,"   &c.  ? 

486.  Monosyllables  are  rarely  prolonged  except  as  in  the 
above  instances.  In  some  cases,  however,  as  in  "bath,"  "dance," 
a  vowel  varies  very  much  in  its  pronunciation,  and  is  often  pro- 
nounced (though  the  incorrectness  of  the  pronunciation  would  now 
be  generally  recognized)  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  a  quasi-dissyllabic 
sound. 

"You  and  |  your  era  \fts,  you  |  have  craft  |  ed  fair." 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  118. 

"  I'f  that  |  you  will  |  France  \  win, 
Then  with  |  Scotland  |  first  be  |  gin."— lien.   V.  i.  2.  167. 

In  a  few  other  cases  monosyllables  are,  perhaps,  prolonged  : 

"You  shall  I  read  us  I  the  wS  I  //.     Cse's  |  ar's  will  ! " 

J.  C.  Hi.  2.  153. 
"Cos.  Cicer  |  o  6n  \  e? 
Mes.  Cic  |  ero  |  is  dead."—  Ib.  iv.  3.  179. 

"I'  will  |  ever  |  be  your  |  head, 
So  be  |  g6ne  ;  \  you  are  |  sped." — M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  72. 

"  Then  shall  |  the  realm  |  of  Alb  |  ion 

C6me  |  to  great  |  confiis  |  ion." — Lear,  iii.  2.  92. 

"For  our  I  best  act.  I  I'f  we  I  shall  sfd  \  nd  still." 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  85. 
(Can  "all"  have  dropped  out  after  "  shall?") 

"The  thank  |  ings  of  |  a  ki  \  ng.     I'  |  am,  sir." 

Cymb.  v.  5.  407. 
"  Here  she  |  cdmes,  \  curst  and  |  sad  : 

Cupid  |  is  a  |  knavish  |  lad." — M.  N.  1).  iii.  2.  439. 

"Well"  (481)  is  prolonged  as  an  exclamation,  and  perhaps 
there  is  a  prolongation  of  the  same  sound  in 

"Melt  |  ed  as  |  the  snow  |  seems  to  |  me  now." 

M.  N.  D.  iv.  i.  163. 
So,  in  "  The  go  |  ds,  not  |  the  patn'c  |  ians,  make  |  it,  and," 

Coriol.  i.  I.  75. 

"gods"  is  probably  prolonged  by  emphasis,  and  the  second  "the" 
is  not  accented.     So  "  most  "  in 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  385 

"With  Ti  |  tus  Larcius,  |  a  m6  \  st  val  |  iant  Roman." 

Coriol.  L  2.  14. 

*' Larcius"  has  probably  but  one  accent.      However,    "a"  appears 
sometimes  to  have  the  accent. 
So,  perhaps, 

"  Ang.  Where  pray  |  ers  cr6  \  ss. 

Jsab.  A't  |  what  hour  |  to-morrow?" 

M.  for  M.  ii.  2.  159. 

"  Drachm  "  (Folio  "  Drachme  ")  is  a  dissyllable  in 

"  A't  a  |  qrack'd  drdch  \  m  !  Cush  |  ions,  lead  |  en  spoons." 

Coriol.  i.  5.  6. 

487.  E  mute  pronounced.  This  is  a  trace  of  the  Early  English 
pronunciation. 

£s,  s.     "Your  grace  I  mistak  I  es:  on  I  ly  to  |  be  brief." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  i). 
"Who's  there,  |  that  knock  |  (e)j  so  |  imper  |  iously"?" 

I  Hen.   VI.  i.  3.  5. 
"Well,  let  j  them  rest :  I  come  hith  |  er,  Cat  |  esbf." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  157. 

"  Here  comes  I  his  serv  |  ant.     How  |  now,  Cat  |  esby  ?" 

Ib.  7.  58. 

"Till  all  I  thy  bones  I  with  ach  I  es  make  |  thee  roar." 

Temp.  i.  2.  370. 
"A'clvj  I  contract,  I  and  starve  I  your  sup  |  pie  joints." 

T.ofA.\.\.  257,  v.  i.  20-2. 

But  this  word  seems  to  have  been  pronounced,  when  a  noun, 
"aatch."  At  least  it  is  made  by  Spenser,  Sh.  Cat.  Aug.  4,  to 
rhyme  with  "matche." 

"Send  Co  I  &vile  I  with  his  I  confed  I  crates." 

2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  3.  79. 
So    "  Worn*  |  ter,  get  |  thee  gone !  |  For  I'  |  do  see." 

i  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  15,  iii.  I.  5,  v.  5.  14  (Fol.  omits  "thee"). 
"We  have  ;  |  whereupon  (497)  |  the  earl  |  of  Wore  |  wte'r." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  58. 

So    "  Glou^jter,"  I  Hen.   VI.  i.  3.  4,  6,  62,  and 

"O  lov  |  ing  uncle  (465),  |  kind  duke  |  of  Glou  |  fester." 

I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  142. 

"This  is  the  flower  that  smiles  on  every  one 
To  show  I  his  teeth  I  as  white  I  as  wha  |  lt?s  bone." 

L.  L.  L.  v.  2.  332. 

c  c 


386  SI! A  h'ESPE.  1  KIA.V  GRAMMA  A'. 

So,  in  a  rhyming  passage, 

"Whose  shad  |  ovv  the  |  dismiss  |  ed  bache  |  lor  loves 
Being  |  lass-lorn  ;  |  thy  pole  |  -clipt  vin  |  ^-yard 
And  thy  ]  sea-marge,  |  sterile  |  and  rock  |  y-hard." 

Temp.  iv.  I.  69. 
"She  nev  |  er  had  |  so  sweet  |  a  chang  |  ding." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  23. 
I'cihros  "Fran.   They  van  |  ish'd  strang  |  ely. 

Seb.  No  mat  |  ter,  since." 

Temp.  iii.  3.  40.     But  see  506. 

Possibly  "cradles"  may  approximate  to  a  trisyllable,  "crad(e)les  " 
(so  "jugg(e)ler,"  &c.  477),  in 

"Does  thoughts  |  unveil  |  in  their  |  dumb  crd  \  dies" 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  200. 

The   e   is    probably    not    of  French  but    of    Latin    origin    in 
"statue  :" 

"She  dreamt  |  to-night  |  she  saw  |  my  stdt  \  ue" 

J.  C.  ii.  2.  76. 
"E'ven  at  |  the  base  |  of  Pom  |  pey's  stdt  \  uS." 

(Folio)  Ib.  iii.  2.  192. 
Globe  "statua." 

So  in  the  plural : 

"But  like  |  dumb  stdt  \  ues  \  of  breath  |  ing  stones." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  25. 
Globe,  " statuas." 

"  No  marble  statua  nor  high 
Aspiring  pyramid  be  raised." — HABINGTON  (Walker). 

488.  The  "e  "  in  commandment,  entertainment,  &c.,  which 

originally  preceded  the  final  syllable,  is  sometimes  retained,  and, 
even  where  not  retained,   sometimes  pronounced. 

"Be  val  |  ued  'gainst  |  your  wife's  |  command  |  (^)ment." 

M.ofV.iv.  i.  451. 
"From  him  |  I  have  |  express  |  command  |  (^)ment." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  20. 
The  e  is  inserted  m 

"If  to  women  he  be  bent 

They  have  at  command<?ment. " — P.  P.  418. 
"  Good  sir,  |  you'll  give  |  them  en  |  tertain  |  (<?)ment." 

B.  J.  Fox,  iii.  2. 


LENGTHENING  OF  WORDS.  387 

Perhaps  an  e  is  to  be  sounded  between  d  and  v  in 

"  A'nton  |  y  Wood  |  (^)ville,  |  her  broth  |  er  there." 

Rich.  IIL  i.  i.  67. 

489.  E    final  in   French  names  is  often  retained  in  sound 
as  well  as  spelling  : 

"The  mel  |  anchol  |  y  Jdq  \  ues  grieves  |  at  that." 

A.  Y.  L.  ii.  i.  26. 
"O  my  |  Par6ll  \  es,  they  |  have  marr  |  ied  me." 

A.  W.  ii.  3.  289. 
"His  grace  |  is  at  |  Marseill  \  es,  to  |  which  place." 

Ib.  iv.  3.  9  ;  T.  of  Sh.  ii.  r.  377. 
"Daughter  |  to  Char  \  lemdin,  \  who  was  |  the  son." 

Hen.  V.  i.  2.  75. 
"  Guienne,  |  Champdg  \  net  Rhe  |  ims,   O'r  |  leans." 

i  Hen.  VI.  i.  i.  60. 

"  This  prince  |  Montdig  \  ne,  if  |  he  be  |  no  more." 
"He  can  |  not  say  |  but  that  |  Montdig  \  ne  yet." 

DANIKL  (on  Florio). 
"Now  Esp  \  erdnc  \  e,  Per  |  cy,  and  |  set  on." 

i  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  97. 
"Call'd  the  |  brave  16rd  |  Ponton  |  de  Sdu  \  trailles." 

i  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  28. 
"  Dieu  de  |  battdi  \  lies!     Where  |  have  they  |  this  mettle?" 

Hen.   V.  iii.  5.  15. 
So  in  "  Vive  :" 

"  '  Vive  \  le  roi,'  |  as  I'  |  have  bank'd  |  their  towns." 

K.  J.  v.  2.  104. 

Thus,  perhaps,  we  may  explain  the  apparent  trisyllabic  "marshal" 
by  a  reference  to  "  mareschal :" 

"Great  mar  |  (e)shal  |  to  Hen  |  (e)ry  (477)  |  the  Sixth." 

i  Hen.  VI.  iv.  7.  70. 
"With  wing  |  ed  haste  |  to  the  |  lord  mar  |  (e)shal." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iv.  4.  2. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  influence  of  the  r  (see  463)  seems  to  make 
"marshall"  a  quasi- monosyllable  in 

"Lord  marshal,  \  command  |  our  off  |  icers  |  at  arms." 

Kick.  II.  i.  i.  204. 

The  /  in  the  French  "capitaine"  is  invisibly  active  in 

"A  wise  |  stout  cap  |  (*')tain,  |  and  soon  |  persuaded." 

3  Hen.   VI.  iv.  7.  30  ;  Macbeth,  i.  2.  34. 

C   C   2 


SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 


ACCENT. 

490.  Words  in  which  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than 
with  us. 

Many  words,  such  as  "edict,"  "outrage,"  "contract,"  &c.,  are 
accented  in  a  varying  manner.  The  key  to  this  inconsistency  is, 
perhaps,  to  be  found  in  Ben  Jonson's  remark  that  all  dissyllabic 
nouns,  if  they  be  simple,  are  accented  on  the  first.  Hence  "edict" 
and  "outrage"  would  generally  be  accented  on  the  first,  but,  when 
they  were  regarded  as  derived  from  verbs,  they  would  be  accented 
on  the  second.  And  so,  perhaps,  when  "exile"  is  regarded  as  a 
person,  and  therefore  a  "simple"  noun,  the  accent  is  on  the  first ; 
but  when  as  "the  state  of  being  exiled,"  it  is  on  the  last.  But 
naturally,  where  the  difference  is  so  slight,  much  variety  may  be 
expected.  Ben  Jonson  adds  that  "  all  verbs  coming  from  the  Latin, 
either  of  the  supine  or  otherwise,  hold  the  accent  as  it  is  found 
in  the  first  person  present  of  those  Latin  verbs  ;  as  from  celebro, 
celebrate."  Without  entering  into  the  details  of  this  rule,  it  seems 
probable  that  "edict,"  "precept,"  betray  Latin  influence.  The 
same  fluctuation  between  the  English  and  French  accent  is  found  in 
CHAUCER  (Prof.  Child,  quoted  by  Ellis,  E.  E.  Pronunc.  i.  369), 
who  uses  "bataille,"  C.  T.  990,  and  "batail,"  ib.  2099  :  "For- 
tune,"/^. 917,  and  "fortune,"  ib.  927;  "  daunger, "  and  "daunger." 

Abject  ( Latin). — "We  are  |  the  queen's  |  objects,  \  and  must  |  obey." 

Rich.  III.  i.  i.  106. 
But  if  the  monosyllable  "queen"  be  emphasized,  we  may  scan 

1 4  We  are  |  the  que  |  en's  dbjccts,  \  and  must  |  obey. " 
Access  ( Latin }.—W.  T.  v.  i.  87. 
Aspect  (Latin).— A.  and  C.  i.  5.  33  ;   T.  N.  i.  4.  28. 

Characters. —  "I  say  |  without  |  chardc  \  ters  fame  |  lives  long." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  i.  81  ;  Hamlet,  i.  3.  f/j. 
Commendable. 

"Thanks  faith,  |  for  silence  |  is  only  |  command  \  able 
In  a  neat's  |  tongue  dried  |  and  a  maid  |  not  vend  |  ible. " 

M  ofV.\.  i.  111. 
This  shows  how  we  must  scan 

"'Tis  sweet  and  (497)  |  commend  \  able  in  |  your  na  |  ture, 
Hamlet."— Hamlet,  i.  2.  87. 


ACCENT.  389 

But,  on  the  other  hand, 

"  And  power,  |  unto  |  itself  |  most  c6m  \  mendable." 

Coriol.  iv.  7.  51. 
Commerce  (Latin). — So  arrange 

"Peaceful  |  commerce  \  from  di  |  vida-  |  ble  shores." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  105. 
Confiscate  (Latin).— C.  of  E.  i.  I.  21 ;  but  "confiscate,"^,  i.  2.  2. 

Com6rt  (Latin). — "What   say'st  |  thou?   Wilt  |  thou  be  |  of  our  | 

consdrt?" — T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  I.  64. 
"      Edmund.  Yes,  madam, 

He  was  |  of  that  |  consdrt. 
Reg.  No  mar  |  vel,  then." 

Lear,  ii.  I.  99. 

Contrary ( Latin). — "Our wills  |  and  fates  |  do  so  |  contra  \  ry  run." 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  221. 
Contract  (Latin). 

"Mark  our  |  contract,  \   Mark  your  |  divorce,  |  young  sir." 
W.  T.  iv.  4.  428  ;  A.    W.  ii.  3.  185  ;    I  Hen.    YI.  iii. 
i.    143,  v.    4.   156;  Rich.    III.   iii.   7.  5,   6 ;    Temp. 
ii.  i.  151. 
Compact  (Latin,  noun).—  Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  133;  J.  C.  ii.  2.  215. 

Different  (Latin). — "And    much  |  differ  \  ent   from  |  the    man  |  he 
was." — C.  of  E.  v.  i.  46. 

Here,   however,  by   emphasizing   the  monosyllable   "much,"   the 
\vord  "  different"  may  be  pronounced  in  the  usual  way. 
Edict  (Latin).— 2  Hen.   VI.  iii.  2.  258,  and 

"It  stands  |  as  an  |  edict  \  in  des  |  tiny." 

M.  N.  D.  i.  i.  151. 
Effigies  (Latin  unaltered). 

"  And  as  I  mine  eye  I  doth  his  |  efft  \  gies  witness." 

A.   Y.  L.  ii.  7.  193. 
Enry  (verb  ;  noun,  envy). 

"  I's  it  |  for  him  |  you  do  |  envy  \  me  so?" — 7\  ofSh.  ii.  1. 18. 
I'lxcciitors. — Hen.     V.   i.    2.    203  is  not  an   instance,   for  it  means 
"executioners."     In  its  legal  sense,  Ib.  iv.  2.  51,  it  is  accented  as 
with  us. 

Exile  (Latin).—  R.  and  J.  v.  3.  211  (frequent). 
Instinct  (noun,  Latin). 

"Hath,  by  I  instinct,  \  knowledge  I  from  6th  I  ers1  eyes." 

2  Hen.  7K  i.  I.  86. 


390  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"By  a  I  divine  I  instinct  \  men's  minds  |  mistrust." 

Rich.  III.  ii.  3.  42  ;  Coriol.  v.  3.  35. 

Irtt6.— See  4570. 

Misery. — Some  commentators  lay  the  accent  on  the  penultimate  in 

"Of  such  |  miser  \  y  doth  |  she  cut  |  me  off," 

M.  of  K  iv.  I.  272. 

but  much  more  probably  "a"  has  dropped  out  after  "such." 
The  passage 

"And  buss  |  thee  as  |  thy  wife.  |    Miser  |  y's  love," 

K.  J.  iii.  4.  35. 

proves  nothing.     The  pause-accent  is  sufficient  to  justify  "misery." 
Nothing. — See  Something,  below. 

Obdurate  (Latin).— 3  Hen.  VI.  i.  4.  142  ;  M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  8  ;  T.  A. 
ii.  3.  160  ;  R.  of  L.  429. 

"A'rt  thou  |  obdu  \  rate,  flin  |  ty,  hard  |  as  steel?" 

V.  and  A.  198. 
Opportune   (Latin). — "And   most  |  opp6rt\  une    to  I  our    need  I 

I  have."—  W.  T.  iv.  4.  511. 
"The  most  |  opport  |  une  place,  |  the  strong' st  |  suggestion." 

Temp.  iv.  I.  26. 

Outrage.— \  Hen.   VI.  iv.  I.  126. 
Peremptory  (perhaps). 

"Yea,  mis  |  tress,  are  |  you  so  |  peremp  |  tory?" 

P.  of  T.  ii.  5.  73. 

This  accentuation  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  Shakespeare  :  but  the 
author  of  Pericles  of  Tyre  may  have  used  it.  It  is  possible,  however, 
to  scan 

"  Yea,  mis  |  t(e)ress  (477),  |  are  you  |  so  pe  |  rempt(o)r^  ?  " 
Portents.— "These  are  \portents:  \  but  yet  |  I  hope,  |  I  hope." 

Othello,  v.  2.  45. 

So  i  Hen.  IV.  ii.  3.  65  ;   Tr.  and  Cr.  \.  3.  96. 
Hencs  "fear"  is  not  a  dissyllable  in 

"A  prod  |  igy  |  of  fear,  |  and  a  |  portent." 

i  Hen.  IV.  v.  I.  20. 
If  "and  "  is  correct,  we  must  probably  scan  as  follows  : 

"And  these  |  doth  she  apply  j  for  warn  |  ings  and  |  portents." 

J.  C.  ii.  2.  80. 

Precepts   (Latin).—  Hen.    V.   iii.   3.    26;    but   "precepts,"  If  am  let, 
ii.  2.  142. 


ACC1-.XT.  391 

Prescience  retains  the  accent  of  science,  indicating  that  the  word 
was  not  familiar  enough  as  yet  to  be  regarded  as  other  than  a 
compound  : 

"Forestall  |  preset  \  ence  and  |  esteem  |  no  act." 

TV.  and  Cr.  i.  3.  199. 
AWr</(noun,  Latin).— A'/V//.  ///.  iii.  I.  72,  iv.  4.  28  ;  T.N.\.i.  253. 

Sepulchre     (Latin). — "  Banish'd  I  this     frail  j  septil  \  chre     6f  |  our 

flesh."— Rich.  II.  i.  3.  194. 
"Or,  at  I  the  least,  I  in  hers  I  septil  \  chre  thine." 

T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  2.  118. 
"May  like  |  wise  be  |  septil  \  chred  in  |  thy  shade." 

R.  of  L.  805  ;  and,  perhaps,  Lear,  ii.  4.  134. 
Sinister  (Latin). — "Tis  no  I  sints  \  ter  nor  |  no  awk  |  ward  claim." 

lien.   V.  ii.  4.  85. 
So,  but  comically,  in 

"  And  this  |  the  cran  |  ny  is,  |  right  and  |  sinister, 
Through  which  I  the  fear    ful  lov  I  ers  are  |  to  whisper. " 

M.  N.  D.  v.  I.  164. 
Sojtiirn'd  ( perhaps)  in 

"  My  heart  |  to  her  |  but  as  |  guest- wise  |  sojdurn'd" 

Jb.  iii.  2.  171. 
But  (?)  emphasize  "her,"  and  scan 

"  My  heart  |  to  her  |  *  but  |  as  guest-  |  \v\sz  stjonrn'd." 

Something  (sometimes  perhaps).      "My  inward  |  soul 

At  no    thing  tremb  I  les :  at  |  something  \  it  grieves." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  12. 
Compare  perhaps 

"And  I'  |  nothing  \  to  back  |  my  suit  |  at  all." 

Rich.  III.  i.  I.  236. 
But,  if  "I"  be  emphasized,  "nothing"  may  be  pronounced  as  usual. 

"  I  fear  I  nothing  \  what  may  I  be  said  I  against  me." 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  212. 
But  "fear"  may  be  a  dissyllable,  480. 
Sii'cct/u'art. — Hen.   VIII.  i.  4.    94  :  heart  being  regarded  as  a  noun 

instead  of  the  suffix  -ard. 
Triumphing  (Latin)  sometimes. 

"As  'twere  I  triumph  \  ing  at  I  mine  en  |  emies." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  4-  91 . 
Unt6.—  See  45 7  a. 

Welcome,  —  "Xor  friends,  I  nor  foes,  |  to  me  |  welcome  \  you  are." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  170. 


392  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

This  particular  passage  may  be  explained  by  a  pause,  but  "wel- 
come" is  common  in  other  authors. 

Wheref6re  (in  some  cases),  though  it  can  often  be  taken  as  "there- 
fore," and  explained  by  a  preceding  pause. 

"  O'ft  have  I  you  (6ft  I  en  have  |  you  thanks  |  therefore}." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  20. 

"  And  we  [  must  yearn  |  therefore."— Hen.  V.  ii.  3.  6. 

"  Hate  me  !  I  Wherefore?  \  O  me  !  |  what  news,  |  my  love." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  272. 
Perhaps 

"  For  the  [  sound  man.  |  Death  on  |  my  state,  |  wherefore?" 

Lear,  ii.  4.  113. 
But  better 

"  Death  on  my  state  !  (512) 

Wherefore  \  should   he  [  sit    here?  |  This     act  |  persuades 
me." 

491.  -Ised,  when  ending  polysyllables,  generally  has  now  a 

certain  emphasis.  This  is  necessary,  owing  to  the  present  broad 
pronunciation  of  /.  Such  polysyllables  generally  have  now  two 
accents,  the  principal  accent  coming  first.  But  in  Shakespeare's 
time  it  would  seem  that  the  i  approximated  in  some  of  these  words 
to  the  French  /',  and,  the  -ed  being  pronounced,  the  i  in  -ised  was 
unemphatic.  Hence  the  Elizabethan  accent  of  some  of  these  words 
differs  from  the  modern  accent. 

Advertised.— "  As  I'  I  by  friends  I  am  well  |  advert  \  istd." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  501. 
"Wherein  I  he  might  I  the  king  I  his  lord  |  advertise." 

Hen.  VIII.  ii.  4.  178. 
"  I  was  |  advert  \  ised  their  |  great  gen  |  eral  slept." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  111. 
SoM.forM.  i.  i.  42. 

Chastised.— "And  when  I  this  arm  I  of  mine  I  hath  chds  \  tised." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  331. 
"This  cause  |  of  Rome,  |  and  chds  \  tised  \  with  arms." 

T.  A.\.  i.  32. 
This  explains  : 

Can6nized.  — "  Can6n  \  ized,  \  and  wor  I  shipp'd  as  I  a  saint." 

K.  J.  iii.  i.  177. 
"\Vhy  thy  |  can6n  \  idd  bones,  [  hearsed  |  in  death." 

IJamlet,  i.  4.  47. 


ACCENT.  393 

"Are  bra  I  zen  im  |  age(s)  [471]  of  |  canSn  \  iz'd  saints." 

2  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  63. 

Authorized.—"  Author  \  iz'd  ty  |  her  gran  |  dam.     Shame  |  itself." 

Macbeth,  iii.  4.  66. 

"  Author  \  izing  \  thy  tres  |  pass  with  |  compare."— Sonn. 35. 
"His  rude  I  ness  so  |  with  his  |  authdr  \  iz'd  youth." 

L.  C.  104. 
So  once  : 

S0/t!MHist'i/.—"Ot  Ja  I  ques  Fal  |  conbridge  |  solhn  \  nisM" 

L.  L.  L.  ii.  I.  42. 
But  in  M.  of  V.  "solemnised." 


492.  Words  in  which  the  accent  was  nearer  the  begin- 
ning tliail  with  US.  Ben  Jonson  (p.  777)  says  all  nouns,  both 
dissyllabic  (if  they  be  "simple")  and  trisyllabic,  are  accented  on  the 
first  syllable.  Perhaps  this  accounts  for  the  accent  on  c6nfessor,  &c. 
The  accent  on  the  first  syllable  was  the  proper  noun  accent ;  the 
accent  on  the  second  (which  in  the  particular  instance  of  confessor 
ultimately  prevailed)  was  derived  from  the  verb. 

Archbishop.— "The  mar  I  shal  and  1  the  arch  \  bishSp  \  are  strong." 

2  Hen.  IV.  ii.  3.  42,  65. 
Cement  (noun). 

"Your  tern  |  pies  burn  |  ed  in  |  their  a<  |  ment  and." 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  85. 

So  the  verb,  A.  and  C.  ii.  I.  48  ;  iii.  2.  29. 
C6mpeWd  (when  used  as  an  adjective). 

"This  c6m  \pelVd  for  I  tune,  have  |  your  mouth  |  fill'd  up." 

Hen.  VIII.  ii.  3.  87. 
"  I  talk  |  not  of  |  your  soul :  |  our  c6m  \  peWd  sins." 

M.  for  M.  ii.  4.  57. 
Complete. — "A  maid  I  of  grace  I  and  c6m  \plete  maj  |  esty." 

L.  L.  L.  i.  i.  137. 
So  Hamlet,  i.  4.  52  ;  Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  118  ;  Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  189. 

Cdnceal'd.—"  My  c6n  \  ceal'd  la  I  dy  to  |  her  can  |  cell'd  love." 

R.  and  J.  iii.  3.  98. 

Conduct. — The  verb  follows  the  noun  "safe-conduct  "  in 

"  Safe-c6n  \  ducting  \  the  re'b  I  els  from  I  their  ships." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  483. 
But  the  noun  is  conduct  in  T.  A.  iv.  3.  65. 


394  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

C6nfessor.—Hen.  VII L  i.  2.  149;  R.  and  J.  ii.  6.  21,  iii.  3.  49. 

"  O'ne  of  |  our  co  (sic]  \  vent  and  |  his  c6n  \fess6r." 

M.  for  M.  iv.  3.  133. 

CdngeaTd. — "  O'pen  |   their    c6n  \  geaVd    mouths  |  and    bleed  | 
afresh."— Rich.  III.  i.  2.  56. 

Conjure  (in  the  sense  of  "entreat").— 71.  G.  of  V.  ii.  7.  2  ;  frequent. 
Cdnsigifd. — "With   dis  \  tinct   breath,  |  and   c6n  \  sign' d   kiss  |  es 

to  them."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  iv.  4.  47. 
See  "•distinct"  below. 
CSrrosive. — "Care  is  |  no  cure,  |  but  ra  |  ther  c6r  \  roslve." 

I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  3  ;  2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  403. 
Detectable.— "Making  |  the  hard  |  way  soft  |  and  de  \  lectdble." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  7. 
Detestable:— "  And  I'  |  will  kiss  |  thy  dt\  testd  \  ble  bones." 

K.  J.  iii.  4.  29  ;  T.  of  A.  iv.  i.  33. 
Distinct.— "To  offend  |  and  judge  |  are  dis  \  tinct  off  |  ices." 

M.  of  V.  ii.  9.  61. 
See  "  consign*  d"  above. 

Fbrlorn. — "Now  for  |  the  hon  |  our  of  |  the  fdr  \  lorn  French." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  19. 

Humane. — "  It  is  |  the  hum  \  oneway,  \  the  6th  |  er  course." 

Coriol.  iii.  i.  327. 

Maintain. — "That  here  |  you  main  \  tain  sev  |  eral  fac  |  tions." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  I.  71. 

Mdture. — So  apparently  in 

"  Of  murder  |  ous  lechers:  |  and  in  |  the  md  \  ture  time." 

Lear,  iv.  6.  228. 

This  is  like  "nature,"  but  I  know  no  other  instance  of  "mature." 
Mtthinks  (sometimes). 

"  So  your  |  sweet  hue  |  which  ;«/ 1  thinks  still  |  doth  stand." 

So  nn.  104. 

I  cannot  find  a  conclusive  instance  in  Shakespeare,  but  this  word 
is  often  (Walker)  thus  accented  in  Elizabethan  writers. 
Miitiners.— Coriol.  i.  I.  492.      See  Planers  below. 
Myself  (perhaps,  but  by  no  means  certainly,  in) 

"I  my\  self  fight  |  not  once  |  in  for  |  ty  year." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  3.  91. 

But  certainly  himself,  myself,  &c.  are  often  found  in  Elizabethan 
authors,  especially  in  Spenser  : 


ACCENT.  395 

"  Mourns  inwardly  and  makes  to  himsdfe  mone." 

SPENS.  F.  Q.  ii.  i.  42. 

The  reason  for  this  is  that  self,  being  an  adjective  and  not  a  noun, 
is  not  entitled  to,  and  had  not  yet  invariably  received,  the  emphasis 
which  it  has  acquired  in  modern  times. 
And  so,  perhaps  : 

"And  band  |  ing  them  \  selves  in  |  contra  (490)  |  ry  parts." 

i  Hen.  VI.  iii.  i.  81. 

N6rthampton.  —  "\.z.<&    night  |  I    hear  |  they    lay  [  at    N6rth-  \ 

ampt6n."—Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  1. 
Obscure  (adj. ;  as  a  verb,  obscnrc}. 

"To  rib  |  her  cere  |  cloth  in  |  the  6b  \  saire  grave." 

M.  ofV.  ii.  7.  51. 
"His  means  |  of  death,  |  his  6b  \  scure  fu  |  neral." 

Hamlet,  iv.  5.  213. 
Clbservant. — "Than  twen  |  ty  sill  |  y  duck  |  ing  6b  \  servants." 

Lear,  ii.  2.  109. 

Pcrstver — "Ay,  do,  |  persev  \  er,   count  |  erfeit  |  sad  looks." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  236  ;  A.  W.  iii.  7.  31 ;  K.  J.  ii.  I.  421  ; 
Hamlet,  i.  2.  92. 

This  is  the  Latin  accent  in  accordance  with  Ben  Jonson's  rule. 
"Bounty,  \persev  \  (e}rance,  mer  |  cy,  low  |  liness." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  93. 
Perspective.— A.  W.  v.  3.  48;  Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  18. 

The  double  accent  seems  to  have  been  disliked  by  the  Eliza- 
bethans. They  wrote  and  pronounced  "muleters"  for  "muleteers," 
"enginer"  (Hamlet,  iii.  4.  206)  for  "engineer,"  "pioners"  for 
"pioneers."  This  explains  : 

/'toners. — "A    worth  |  y   plotter.    \    Once    mbre  |  remove,  [  good 

friends."'—  Hamlet,  i.  5.  162. 
Plebeians  (almost  always). 

"The//t#  |  eidns  \  have  got  |  your  fel  |  low-tribune." 

Coriol.  v.  4.  39  ;  i.  9.  7,  &c. 
This  explains 

"  Let  them  |  have  cush  |  ions  by  you.  I  You're//^  |  eidns." 

Ib.  iii.  i.  101. 
Kxceptions  :  Hen.  V.  v.  Chorus,  27  ;   T.  A.  i.  I.  231. 

So  "  Epicurean"  in  Eli/abethan  authors  and  A.  and  C.  ii.  I.  24. 
The  Elizabethans  generally  did  not  accent  the  e  in  such  words. 


396  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Pursuit. — "  In  pur  \  suit  of  |  the  thing  |  she  would  |  have  stay." 

Sonn.  143. 
"  We  tri  |  fle  time.  |    I  pri  |  thee/7/r  |  sue  sentence. " 

M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  298. 

Purveyor.— "  To  be  |  hispir  \  veyor :  \  but  he  |  rides  well." 

Macbeth,  i.  6.  22. 

Quintessence.  —  "Teaching  |  all  that  |  read  to  |  know 

The  quint  \  essence  |  of  ev  |  ery  sprite." — A.  Y.  L.  iii.  2.  147. 

Recorder  (?).  —  "  To  be  |  spoke  to  |  but  by  |  the  rl  \  corder." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  7.  30. 

So  also  Walker,  who  quotes  from  DONNE'S  Satires,  v.    248,  Ed. 
1633: 

"  Recorder  to  Destiny  on  earth,  and  she." 
But  this  line  might  be  scanned  otherwise. 
Relapse.— "Killing  |  in  rt  \  lapse  of  |  mortal  |  ity." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  107. 
Rheumatic. — "  O'erworn,  |  despi's  |  ed,  rhlu  \  matic,  \  and  old." 

V.  and  A.  135  ;  M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  105. 

So     "  These prdg  \  matic  \  young  men  I  at  their  I  own  weapons." 

B.J. 
Secure. — "  Upon  |  my  se  \  cure  hour  |  thy  vin  |  cle  stole." 

Hamlet,  i.  5.  61  ;  Othello,  iv.  i.  72. 
Sequestered. — "  Why  are  |  you  si  \  quester'd  \  from  all  |  your  train  ?" 

T.  A.  ii.  3.  75. 
Successor  (rare). 

"  For  being  |  not  propp'd  |  by  an  |  cestrp  |  whose  grace 
Chalks  sticc  \  essdrs  \  their  way,  |  nor  call'd  |  upon,"  &c. 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  I.  60. 

Successive  (rare). — "Are  now  |  to  have  |  no  slice  \  essive  \  degrees." 

M.forM.  ii.  2.  98. 
Towards  (sometimes). 

"And  shall  |  contin  |  ue  our  grac  |  es  t6  \  wards  him." 

Macbeth,  i.  6.  30. 

"I  go,  |  and  to  \  wards  three  |  or  four  |  o'clock." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  5.  101. 
Compare  "Should,  like  |  a  swall  |  ow  prey  |  ing  t6  \  wards  storms." 

B.  J.  Poetast.  iv.  7. 

"  O'  the  plague,  |  he's  safe  |  from  think  |  ing  t6  \  ward  London. " 

B.  J.  Alchemist,  i.  I. 


VERSES.  397 

So,  perhaps, 

"I  am  |  informed  |  that  he  |  comes  to  \  wards  London." 

3  Hen.   VI.  iv.  4.  2rt. 
"And  t6  |  ward  Lon  |  don  they  |  do  bend  |  their  course." 

Rich.  III.  iv.  5.  14. 
U' tonsils  (perhaps). 

"  He  has  brave  utensils  ;  for  so  he  calls  them." 

Temp.  iii.  2.  104. 
/  V It hoid.  —  S  ee  45  7  a. 

The  English  tendency,  as  opposed  to  the  Latin,  is  illustrated  by 
the  accentuation  of  the  first  syllable  of  "  ignominy,"  and  its  con- 
sequent contraction  into  "  ignomy"  (i  Hen.  IV.  v.  4.  100,  &c. ). 

VERSES. 

493.  A  proper  Alexandrine  with  six  accents,  such  as— 

"And  now  |  by  winds  |  and  waves  |  my  life  |  less  limbs  |  are 
tossed," — DRYDEN. 

is  seldom  found  in  Shakespeare. 

494.  Apparent    Alexandrines.      The  following  are  Alexan- 
drines only  in  appearance.     The  last  foot  contains,  instead  of  one 
extra  syllable,   two  extra   syllables,   one   of  which  is  slurred   (see 
467-9)  :— 

"The  mini  I  bers  of  |  our  host  |  and  make  |  discovery   (di.v- 

cov'ry). — Macbeth,  v.  4.  6. 
"He  thinks  |  me  now  |  incap  |  able;  |  confederates" 

Tempest,  \.  2.  111. 

"  In  vir  |  tue  than  |  in  ve'n  |  geance  :  they  |  bein^  penitent."1 

Ib.  v.  i.  28. 

"And  more  |  divers  |  ity  |  of  sounds  |  s\\  hSrrible." — /£.  235. 
"In  bitt  |  erness.  |    The  comm  |  on  c"x  \  ecutioncr" 

A.   Y.  L.  iii.  5.  :j. 

"I  see  |  no  more  |  in  you  |  than  in  |  the  Ordinary. " — Ib.  42. 
"  Were  rich  |  and  hon  I  ourable;  I  besides  |  tiMgAttlcMfii." 

T.  G.  of  V.  iii.  i.  64. 

"Which  since  |  have  stead  |  ed  much  ;  |  so,  of  |  his  gentle- 
ness"—Temp,  i.  2.  165  ;  Rich.  III.  v.  3.  245  ;  Hen.  V. 
ii.  2.  71. 

For  the  contraction  of  "gentleman"  to   "gentl'man,"  or  even 
"genman,"  see  461. 


39S  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Are    you  |  not    grieved  |  that    A'r  |  thur    is  |  his  prisoner 
(468)?"— K.  J.  iii.  4.  123. 

"  And  I'  |  must  free  |  ly  have  |  the  half  |  of  Anything." 

M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  251. 

"To   mask  |  thy   monst  |  rous   visage.  |    Seek   none  |  con- 
spiracy."—J.  C.  ii.  I.  81. 

"Had   he  |  been  vanq  |  u(i)sher,    as,  |  by"   the  |  same   cove- 
nant."—Hamlet,  i.  i.  93. 

"My  lord,  |  I  came  j  to  see  |  your  fa  |  ther's  funeral." 

Ib.  i.  2.  176. 

"Untaint  |  ed,  un  |  exam  |  in'd,  free,  |  at  liberty." 

Rich.  III.  iii.  6.  9. 

"And  so  |  doth  mine.  |  I  muse  |  why  she's  |  at  liberty." 

Ib.  i.  3.  305. 
So,  perhaps, 

"  From  too  |  much  li  |  berty,  |  my  Lu  |  cio,    liberty." 

M.for  M.      2.  129. 
"  Alaso  |  lute  Mi  |  Ian.     Me,  |  poor  man,  |  my  library." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  109. 
"  Shall  see  |  advant  |  agea  |  ble  for  |  our  dignity." 

Hen.  V.  v.  2.  88. 
unless  "  advantage  |  able  for  |  . " 

495.  Sometimes  the  two  syllables  are  inserted  at  the  end  of  the 
third  or  fourth  foot — 

' '  The  flux  |  of  company.  \  Anon  |  a  care  |  less  herd. " 

A.   Y.  L.  ii.  i.  52. 

"To  call  |  for  recompense;  \  appear  |  it  t6  |  your  mind." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  3. 
"Is  not  |  so  estima  |  ble,   pro  |  fita  |  ble  neither." 

M.  of  V.  i.  3.  167. 
"O'erbears  |  your  officers;  \  the  rab  |  ble  call  |  him  lord." 

Hamlet,  iv.  5.  102. 
"To  me  |  inveterate,  \  hearkens  |  my  broth  |  er's  suit." 

Temp.  i.  2.  122. 
"  With  all  |  prerogative.  \   Hence  his  |  ambit  |  ion  growing." 

Ib.  i.  2.  105. 

"  In   base  |  appllance(s)  (471).  |   This   out  |  ward   saint  |  ed 
deputy  (468)."— M.for  M.  iii.  r.  89. 

"Than  we  |  bring  men  |  \.o  comfort  them  ('em).  \  The  fault's  | 
your  own." — Tempest,  ii.  I.  134-5. 


r/lRSES.  399 

496.  In  other  cases  the  appearance  of  an  Alexandrine  arises  from 
the  non-observance  of  contractions — 

"I  dare  |  abide  |  no  longer  (454).  |  Whtther  (466)  should  I 
I  fly"?"— Macbeth,  iv.  2.  73. 

"She  le  |  vell'd  at  |  our///r  |  pose(s)  (471),  and,  |  being (470) 
ro^al." — A.  and  C.  v.  2.  339. 

"All  mort  |  al  c6nse  \  qiience(s](^j\]  have  |  pronounced  |  me 
thus. "— Macbeth,  v.  3.  5. 

"  As  mi's  |  ers  do  |  by  beggars  (454) ;  |  neither  (466)  gave  | 
to  me."—  Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  142. 

497.  Apparent    Alexandrines.      The   following   can   be  ex- 
plained by  the  omission  of  unemphatic  syllables  : — 

"  HOT.   Hail  to  [  your  lordship.  | 
J/tun.  I  am  (/'///)  glad  |  to  see  |  you  well." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  160. 
"Whereof  |  he  is  the  (he's  ttf}  head ;  |  then  if  |  he  says  |  he 

loves  you." — Ib.  i.  3.  24. 
"Thou  art  sworn  |  as   deeply  j  to  (/')    effect  I  what   we  I 

intend."— Rich.  III.  iii.  i.  158. 
"I  had  thought,  |  my  lord,  |  to  have  le'arn'd  |  his  health  | 

of  you." — Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  24. 
"  That  trace  him  |  in  his  (in's)  line.    |  No  boast  |  ing  like 

|  a  fool." — Macbeth,  iv.  I.  153. 
"  In  seeming  |  to  augment  |  it  wastes  |  it.     Be  |  advis'd." 

Hen.  VIII.  i.  i.  145. 
"When  mir(fl)  |  cles  have  |  by  the  great  |  est  been  I  denied." 

A.  W.  ii.  i.  144. 
"  Persuades  |  me  //  is  (/'j)  6th  |  erwise  ;  |  howe'er  I  it  beV' 

Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  29. 
"  A  worth  |  y  6ff(i)cer  \  f  the  war,  |  but  in  |  solent." 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  30. 
"I  promise  |  you  I'  am  ('/;;)  |  afraid  |  to  hear  |  you  tell  it." 

Ib.  i.  4.  65. 
"Come,  sis  |  ter,  cousin  |  I  would  ('A/)  say,  |  pray  par  |  don 

me."— Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  105. 
"  That   made  |  them   do  it  (V).  |  They  are  (re}  wise  |  and 

hon  |  (<w)nible."— J.  C.  iii.  2.  218. 

"  With   all  |  prerogative  ;  j  hence   his  |  ambit  |  ion    grow- 
ing."— Tempest,  i.  2.  105. 
"  Mine  eyes  |  even  soc  |  iable  |  to  the  show  |  of  thine." 

Ib.  v.  i.  63. 


400  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  As  great  |  tome  |  as  late;  |  and  support  |  able." 

Temp.  v.  i.  14G. 
unless  "  supportable"  can  be  accented  on  the  first. 

"Ostentation"  is  perhaps  for  "  ostention  "  (Walker),  and  "the" 
is  "th',"  in 

"  The  ostentation  of  our  love  which,  left  unshown." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  6.  52. 
"  Is  "  ought  probably  to  be  omitted  in 

"  With  gol  |  den  cheru  |  bims  (is)  fretted;  |  her  an  |  dirons." 

Cymb.  ii.  4.  88. 
"  So  saucy  |   with   the   hand  |  of  she  |  here — what's  )  her 

name?" — A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  98. 
"  Come  Lam  |  mas  eve  |  at  night  |  shall  she  be  |  fourteen." 

R.  andj.  i.  3.  17. 
"  Of  6ffic(467)  |  er,  (465)  and  off  |  ice  set  |  all  hearts  |  in  the 

(f  th')  slate."— Tempest,  i.  2.  84. 
"Uncoup  |  ^(465)  in  the  (f  th')  west  |  ern  vail  |  ey,  let  |  them 

g6."— M  ,V.  D.  iv.  i.  112. 
"  Come  to  |  one    mark ;  |  as    many  |  ways   meet    in  \  one 

town."— Hen.  V.  i.  2.  208. 
"  Verbatim  |  to  rehearse  |  the  meth  |  od  of  |  my  pen." 

i  Hen.  VI.  iii.  I.  13. 
The  following  is  intended  to  be  somewhat  irregular  : 

"  Now  by  |  mine  hon  |  our,  by^  |  my  life,  |  by  my  troth." 

Rich.  II.  v.  2.  78. 
We  must  probably  scan  as  an  ordinary  line, 

"  That  seeming  |  to  be  most  |  which  we  |  indeed  |  least  are," 

T.  ofSh.  v.  2.  175. 
since  it  rhymes  with  an  ordinary  line, 

"  Our  strength  |  as  weak,  |  our  weak  |  ness  past  |  compare." 
The  following  can  be  explained  by  the  quasi-omission  of  unem- 
phatic  syllables  : 

"  Away  !  |  though  part  |  ing  be  |  a  dread  |  ful  corr(0)sive." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iii.  2.  403. 

"Corrosive,"  as  in  I  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  3,  is  accented  on  the  first, 
and  here  pronounced  "corsive." 

"  But  with  |  a  knave  [  of  comm  |  on  hire,  |  a  gond(0)lier." 

Othello,  i.  I.  126. 
"  Our"  is  not  a  dissyllable,  but  "ag'd"  is  a  monosyllable  in 

"  But  love,  |  dear  love,  |  and  our  |  agd  fa  |  ther's  right." 

Lear,  iv.  4.  28. 


VERSES.  401 

So  perhaps 

"An  dg'd  |  inter  |  preter  |  though  young  |  in  years." 

T.  of  A.  v.  3.  6. 

498.  Alexandrines  doubtful.  There  are  several  apparent 
Alexandrines,  in  which  a  shortening  of  a  preposition  would  reduce 
the  line  to  an  ordinary  line.  "Upon,"  for  instance,  might  lose  its 
prefix,  like  "'gainst"  for  "against." 

"  To  look  I  upon  my  some  I  time  mas  I  ter's  r6y  I  al  face." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  5.  75. 
"  Forbids  I  to  dwell  up  \  on  ;  yet  I  remem  |  ber  this." 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  239. 
"  Upon  our  |  house('s)  (471)  thatch,  |  whiles  a  |  more  frost  |  y 

people." — Hen.  V.  iii.  5.  24. 
"  Upon  the  sis  |  terhood,  |  the  vo  |  tarists  of  |  St.  Clare." 

M.forM.  i.  4.  5. 
"  Brut.   "Is  like  |  to  lay  upon  us  (on's).  I 

Cass.  I'm  glad  j  that  m^  |  weak  words." 

7  C.  i.  2.  176. 
"  Is  gone  |  to  pray  |  the  ho  |  ly  king  |  upon  his  (on's)   aid." 

Macbeth,  iii.  6.  30. 
So  "to "  (or  " in,"  457«)  in  " into "  may  be  dropped  in 

"  Fall  into  I  the  c6m  |  pass  of  |  a  prae'  |  munire." 

Hen.  VIII.  iii.  2.  340. 
"The  watches  |  on  unto  \  mine  eyes  |  the  out  |  ward  watch." 

Rich.  II.  v.  4.  52. 

(?)  "  Rather  |  a  ditch  |  in  E'gypt 

Be  gentle  |  grave  tinto  \  me.    Rdther  |  on  Ni  |  lus'  mud." 

A.  and  C.  v.  2.  58. 

"Gentle"  is  a  quasi-monosyllable,  see  465  ;  "rather,"  see  466. 
So  Walker  reads  "  to"  for  "unto"  in 

"  Unto    a    poor,    |  but    worth   |   y    gent  [  leman.   |    She's 

wedded," — Cyinb.  i.  I.  7. 

and  observes,   "  Unto  and  into  have  elsewhere,  I  think,  taken  the 
place  of  to." 

Perhaps  the  second  line  of  the  rhyming  couplet  is  purposely 
lengthened  in 

"  I'  am  |  for  the  air;  |  this  night  |  I'll  spend 

Un'to  \  a  cli's  |  mal  and  |  a  fat  |  al  end." — Macb.  iii.  v.  21. 

In     "  Better  to  leave  undone,  than  by  our  deed 

Acquire  too  high  a  fame  \\ben  him  we  serve's  away," 

A.  and  C.  iii.  I.  15. 


402  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

we  might  arrange 

"  Better  leave  |  undone,  |  than  by  |  our  deed  |  acquire." 
Or  the  latter  line   might   be  (but  there   is   not  pause  enough   to 
make  it  probable)  a  trimeter  couplet.     (See  501.) 

"  At  Ma  |  rian  |  a's  house  |  to-night.    |  Her  cause  |  and  yours," 

M.forM.  iv.  3.  145. 

must  be  an  Alexandrine,  unless  in  the  middle  of  the  line  "Mariana" 
can  be  shortened  like  "Marian,"  as  "Helena"  becomes  "Helen" 
(M.  N.  D.  i.  I.  208).  Compare 

"  For  Mar  |  iana's  sake  :  |  but  as  |  he  adjiidg'd  |  your  brother." 

M.forM.  v.  I.  408. 

The  following  seem  pure  Alexandrines,  or  nearly  so,  if  the  text 
be  correct : — 

"How  dares  (499)  |  thy  harsh  |  rude  tongue  |  sound  this  | 
unpleas  |  ing  news." — Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  74. 

"  Suspi'c  |  ion,  all  |  our  lives,  |  shall  be  |  stuck  full  |  of  eyes." 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  2.  8. 

"A  cher  |  ry  lip,  |  a  bon  |  ny  eye,  |  a  pass  |  ing  pleas  |  ing 
t6ngue." — Rich.  III.  i.  \.  94. 

"  To  the  |  young  R6  |  man  boy  I  she  hath  sold  I  me  and  I 
I  fall."— A.  andC.  iv.  12.  48. 

"  And   these  |  does  she  |  appty  |  for  warn  I  ings  and  I  por- 
tents.''—^ C.  iii.  I.  23. 

This  is  the  Shakespearian  accent  of  "portent"  (490),  but  perhaps 
"  and"  should  be  omitted. 

"  Out  of  |  a  great  |  deal  of  |  old  ir  |  on  I'  |  chose  forth." 

I  Hen.  VI.  i.  2.  101. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  Shakespeare  did  not  write  this  line, 
whether  it  be  read  thus  or 

"  Out  of  |  a  great  deal  |  of  old  [  iron  I'  |  chose  forth." 
In    "  'Tis  he  |  that  sent  j  us  hi'th  |  er  now  |  to  slaugh  |  ter  thee," 

Rich   III.  i.  4.  250. 

"hither"  (466)  may  be  a  monosyllable,  and  then  we  can  read 
"  'Tis  he  |  that  sent  us  |  ." 

The  latter  line  in  the  following  couplet  seems  to  be  an  Alex- 
andrine : 

"  Of  what  |  it  is  |  not :  then,  |  thrice-grac  |  iotis  queen, 
More  than  |  your  lord's  |  depart  |  ure  weep  I  not  :  more's 
|  not  seen."— Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  25,  v.  4.  110. 


VERSES.  403 

Sometimes  apparent  Alexandrines  will  be  reduced  to  ordinary 
lines,  if  exclamations  such  as  "O,"  "Well,"  &c.  be  considered 
(512)  as  detached  syllables. 

"  Vol.  That  they  |  combine  |  not  there.  | 

Cor.  (  Tush,  tush  /) 

Men.  A  good  demand. " 

Corwl.  iii.  2.  45. 
"  Coriol.   The  one  |  by  the  other.  | 

Com.  (Well,}  \  O'n  to  |  the  mark  |  et  place." 

Ib.  iii.  i.  112. 
"  Sic.  'Tis  he,  |  'tis  he:  |  (0,)  he's  grown  |  most  kind  I  of 

late."— Ib.  iv.  6.  11. 
11  Upon  |  the  Brit  |  ish  party.  |  (O,)  unti'me  |  ly  death." 

Lear,  iv.  6.  25. 

In  the  last  two  examples  "  O  "  might  coalesce  with  the  following 
vowel.  But  see  also  503  and  512. 

499.  Apparent  Alexandrines  are  sometimes  regular  verses  of 
five  accents  preceded  or  followed  by  a  foot,  more  or  less  isolated, 
containing  one  accent. 

"(Shall  I)  With  bated  breath  and  whispering  humbleness 
Say  this.   ||  Fair  sir,  I  you  spit  I  on  me  I  on  Wed  I  nesday 

Idst."— M.  ofV.  i.  3.  126. 
"  Have  I  ||  No  friend  |  will  rid  |  me  6f  |  this  liv  |  ing  fear?" 

Rich.  II.  v.  4.  2. 

The  " No"  is  emphatic,  and  there  is  a  slight  pause  after  "I." 
"  Whip  him,  \\  Were't  twen  |  ty  of  |  the  great  |  est  trib  |  u- 

taries." — A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  96. 
"  Come,  c6me,  \\  No  more  |  of  this  |  unprof  |  ita  |  ble  chat." 

I  Hen.  IV.  iii.  i.  63. 
"  There  cannot  be  those  numberless  offences 

'Gainst  me,  \\  that  I'  |  cannot  |  take  peace  |  with:   no  I 

black  envy."— Hen.  VIII.  ii.  I.  85. 
"  A's  you  |  are  cert  |  ainly  |  a  gen  |  tleman,  ||  theretd, 

Clerk-like  |  experi  |  enced."—  W.  T.  i.  2.  391. 
"Besides,  \\  Hike  |  you  not.  |  I'fyou  |  will  know  |  my  house." 

A.   Y.  L.  iii.  5.  74. 

"  Which  to  |  den^  I  concerns  |  more  than  |  avails, 
For  ds  ||  thy  brat  |  hath  been  |  cast  out  |  like  to  |  itself." 

W.  T.  iii.  2.  87. 
"So  it  |  should  now, 

Were  there  |  necess  |  ity   |  in  your  |  request,  ||  although 
'Twere  need  |  ful  1'  |  denied  it."— Ib.  \.  2.  22. 
D  n  2 


P4  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Making  |  practis'd  |  smiles 

A's  in  |  a  look  |  ing  glass,  |  and  then  j  to  sigh,  ||  as  'tivlre 
The  mort  |  o'  the  deer."—  W.  T.  i.  2.  117. 

The  context  might  perhaps  justify  a  pause  after  "  well  "  in 

"  Flor.  To  have  |  them  re  |  compensed  |  as  thought  |  on. 
Cam.  Well,  ||  my  I6rd." 

W.  T.  iv.  4.  532. 
But  better  "  To  have  them  (/'  have  'em)  re  |  compensed." 

"  His  train  |  ing  such 

That  he  |  may  fiirn  |  ish  and  |  instruct  |  great  teachers, 
And  nev  |  er  seek  |  for  aid  |  out  of  |  himself. 
||  Yet  see,"  &c.—Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  114. 

"What,  girl  !  [  though  grey 

Do  some  |  thing  ming  |  le    with  |  our  young  |  er    brown, 

||  yd  hd'  we 
A  brain,"  &c.—  A.  and  C.  iv.  8.  21. 

"  A  certain  number, 
Though  thanks  |  to  all,  |  must  I  |  select  |  from  all.  H    The 

rest 

Shall  bear,"  |  &c.—Coriol.  i.  6.  81  ;  i.  7.  2. 
"  And  the  buildings  of  my  fancy. 
Only— 
There's  one  thing  wanting  which  I  doubt  not  but. " 

Ib.  ii.  i.  216. 

Collier  transposes  "only"  and  "  but  "  to  the  respectively  follow- 
ing lines.     The  line 

"  So  to  esteem  of  us  and  on  our  knees  we  beg," 
ought  probably  to  be  arranged  thus  : 

"  So  to  |^  esteem  j  of  us,  |  and  on  |  our  knees 

We  beg  |  as  re  |  compense  |  of  our  |  dear  services  (471)." 

W.   T.  ii.  3.  150. 
So         "  Whom  I'  |  with  this  |  obe  |  dient  steel,  |  three  inches  (471) 

of  it."—  Temp.  ii.  I.  283  ;  i.e.  "  three  inch  oft." 
So  transpose  "'tis,"  /'.  e.  "it  is,"  to  the  preceding  line  in 
"  York.   I  fear,  |  I  fear,—  | 

Duch.  What  should  |  you  fear?  |  It  {s 

('Tis)     Nothing    but  |  some    bond  |  that   he'  |  is    ent  |  er'd 
into."— Rich.  II.  v.  2.  65. 

"I  do"  must  be  omitted  (456)  before  "beseech  you"  in 

"(I  do)  beseech  |  you,  par  |  don  me,  |  I  may  |  not  show  it." 

Ib.  70. 
So  Cymb.  i.  6.  48. 


VERSES.  405 

500.  Tr  meter  Couplet.    Apparent  Alexandrines  are  often 

couplets  of  two  verses  of  three  accents  each.  They  are  often  thus 
printed  as  two  separate  short  verses  in  the  Folio.  Put  the  degree 
of  separateness  between  the  two  verses  varies  greatly.  Thus 
perhaps  — 

"  Where  it  |  may  see  |  itself;  ||  this  is  |  not  strange  |  at  all." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  iii.  3.  111. 

"That  has  '  he  knows  |  not  what.  ||  Nature,  |  what  things  | 
there  are."     Ib.  iii.  3.  127. 

.And  certainly  in  the  following  :  — 

"Anne.  I  would  |  I  knew  |  thy  heart.  ||  Clou.  Tis  fig  |  ured  in  | 

my  tongue. 
Anne.    I  fe;\r  |  me  both  |  are  false.  ||  Glou.  Then  nev  |  er  man  | 

was  true. 
Anne.    Well,   well,  |  put  up  |  your  sword.   ||  Glou.   Say  then  | 

my  peace  j  is  made."  —  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  193. 
"Jul.   I  would  |  I  knew  |  his  mind.  ||  Luc.  Peruse  |  this  pa  |  per, 

madam. 
Jul.   'To  Jii  I  lia.'     Say,  [  from   whom?   ||   Luc.    That   the  | 

contents  |  will  shew. 

Jul.   Say,  say,  |  who  gave  |  it  thee?"—  T.  G.  ofV.  i.  2.  33-7. 
"Luc.  Go  to;  |  'tis  well;  |  away!  ||  I  sab.    Heaven  keep  |  your 

hon  |  our  safe."  —  M.  for  M.  ii.  2.  156. 
"  Isab.   Shall  I  |  attend  |  your  lordship?   ||    A.   At  an  |  y  time  | 

'forenoon."—/*.  160-9;  ii.  4.  104,  141. 
"A'os.  The  hour  |  that  fools  |  should  ask.  ||  B.  Now  fair  |  befall  | 

your  mask. 

Ros.  Fair  fall  |  the  face  |  it  covers.  ||  B.  And  send  |  you  ma  |  ny 
lovers."—  L.  L.  L.  ii.  I.  123. 


Why  dost  |  thou  ask  |  again?    ||    Prov.    Lest   I  |  might 
be  |  too  rash. 
Prov    Repent  |  ed  o'er  |  his  doom.    ||  Ang.   Go  to,  |  let  that  | 

!>_•  mine  ! 

Ang.   And  you  |  shall  well  j  be  spared.    ||  Prcn>.   I  crave  |  your 
hon  I  our's  pardon."  —  M.  for  M.  ii.  2.  9-12;   Othello,  iii.  3. 
28-31;   Temp.  iii.  i.  31,  59. 

Shakespenre   seems   to   have   used   this   metre   mostly  for  rapid 
dialogue  and  retort.      B.it  in  the  ghost  scene  in  Hamlet  : 

"  Ghost.   To  what  |  1  shall  |  unfold.  || 

Ham.  Speak  ;   1'  |  am  bound  |  to  hear." 

Hamlet,  i.  5.  6. 


406  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

501.  The  trimeter  COUplet,  beside  being  frequent  in  dialogue, 
is  often  used  by  one  and  the  same  speaker,  but  most  frequently  in 
comic,  and  the  lighter  kind  of  serious,  poetry.  It  is  appropriate 
for  Thisbe : 

"  Most  rad  |  iant  Py  |  ramus,  ||  most  lil  |  y-white  |  of  hue." 

M.  N.  D.  iii.  i.  94,  97. 

And  for  Pistol,  when  he  rants  : 

"  An  oath  |  of  mick  |  le  might ;  ||  and  fu  |  ry  shall  |  abate." 
Hen.   V.  ii.  I.  70,  44 ;  ii.  3.  4,  64  ;  v.  I.  93. 
"  He  is  |  not  ve  |  ry  tall :  ||  yet  for  |  his  years  |  he's  tall." 

A.   Y.  L.  iii.  5.  118. 
"  And  Til  |  be  sworn  |  'tis  true:    ||  travell  |  ers    ne'er  |  did 

h'e." — Temp.  iii.  2.  26. 
"  Coy  looks  |  with  heart-  |  sore  sighs  ;  ||  one  fad  |  ing  mo- 

|  ment's  mirth." — T.  G.  of  V.'\.  I.  30. 

"  He  would  |  have  giv'n  |  it  you,||  but  I'  |  being  in  |  the  way 
Did  in  |  your  name  |  receive  it  :   ||  pardon  |  the  fault,  j  I 

pray."— Ib.  39,  40. 
"  A  free-  |  stone  col  |  our'd  hand ;  ||  I  ver  |  ily"  |  did  think." 

A.   Y.  L.  iv.  3.  25. 
"  Then   let's  |  make    haste  |  away,  ||    and   look  |  unto  |  the 

main."— 2  Hen.  VI.  i.  i.  208. 
"  Am  I'  |  not  witch'd  |  like   her?   ||    Or   thou  |  not  false  J 

like  him?"— Ib.  iii.  2.  119. 
"  Why  ring  |  not  out  |  the  bells   ||  aloud  |  throughout  |  the 

town?"— i  Hen.  VI.  i.  6.  12. 
"  As  AL'th  |  iop  |  ian's  tooth,  ||  or  the  |  fann'd  snow  |  that' a 

bolted." — W.  T.  iv.  4.  375. 
"  This   pans  |  ingly  |  ensued.     ||    Neither  |  the    king  |  nor's 

heirs."— Hen.  VIII.  i.  2.  168. 


The    monk 
dang(e) 


might    be  |  'deceiv'd ;    ||    and    that  |  'twas 
rous  for  him." — Ib.  179. 


"  Anon  |  expect  |  him    here  ;  ||  but    if  |  she    be  |  obdu- 
rate (490)."— A'ar/fc.  ///.  iii.  i.  39. 

This  metre  is  often  used  by  the  Elizabethan  writers  in  the  transla- 
tion of  quotations,  inscriptions,  &c.  It  is  used  for  the  inscriptions 
the  caskets  : 

"  Who   choos  |  eth   me  |  shall   gain  ||  what   man  |  y   men  | 

desire. 

Who   choos  |  eth    me  |  must   give  ||  and  haz  |  ard  all  j  he 
hath."— M.  ofV.  ii.  7.  5,  9. 


VERSES.  407 

In  the  pause  between  a  comparison  and  the  fact  such  a  couplet 
may  be  expected. 

"A's  |  ^Ene  |  as  did 

The  old  I  Anchi  |  ses  bear,  ||  so  from  |  the  waves  |  of  Tiber 
Did  I'  |  the  tir  |  ed  Oe'sar."— J.  C.  i.  2.  114. 
"  To  have  |  what  we  |  would  have,  ||  we  speak  |  not  what  |  we 

mean."— M.  for  M.  ii.  4.  118. 

Sometimes  the  first  trimeter  has  an  extra  syllable,  which  takes  the 
place  of  the  first  syllable  of  the  second  trimeter. 

"  Shall  there  |  by  be  |  the  sweeter.   |]  Red  |  son  thus  |  with 

\(k."—M.forM.  iii.  I.  5. 
"  Envel  |  ope  you,  |  good  Provost!  \\  Who  |  call'd  here  |  of 

late?"—/*,  iv.  2   78. 

"  Mdtters  |  of  need  |  ful  valw^r.    ||  We  |  shall  write  |  to  you." 

/*.  i.  i.  56. 

Sometimes  the  first  trimeter,  like  the  ordinary  five-accent  verse, 
has  an  extra  syllable.  In  the  following  examples  the  two  verses  are 
clearly  distinct.  They  might  almost  be  regarded  as  separate  lines  of 
three  accents  rather  than  as  a  couplet : 

41  Hyper  |  ion  t6  |  a  satyr.  |  So  lov  |  ing  to  |  my  mother." 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  140. 
"  For  end  |  ing  thee  |  no  sooner.    ||  Thou  hast  |  nor  youth  | 

nor  age.  — M.  for  M.  iii.  I.  32. 
"  That   I'  |  am   toueh'd  |  with    madam.    ||  Make   not  |  im- 

poss  I  ible."— Ib.  v.  i.  51.    (But  ?  494.) 
"  Arid.   And  do  |  my  spirit  |  ing  gent/y.  || 
Prosp.  Do  so,  |  and  after  |  two  days." 

Tempest,  i.  2.  298. 
"  Below  |  their  cob  |  bled  shoes.  || 

They  say  [  there's  grain  |  enough. " 
Coriol.  i.  I.  200. 

502,  The  COmiC  trimeter,  In  the  rhyming  parts  of  the 
Comedy  of  Errors  and  Love's  Labour  Lost,  there  is  often  great  irre- 
gularity in  the  trimeter  couplet.  Many  of  the  feet  are  trisyllabic, 
and  one-half  of  the  verse  differs  from  the  other.  Often  the  first  half 
is  trochaic  and  the  second  iambic. 

"Ant.  E.   Wherefore?  |  for  my  |  dinner  :  H  I  have  |  not  din'd 

|  to-day." — C.  of  E.  iii.  I.  40. 

"Ant.  E.   r>6  you  I  hear,  you  j  minion?  ii  You'll  let  |  us  in,  | 
I  hope."—/*.  54. 


408  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

In  the   following,    the   former  half   is    iambic    and    the    latter 
anapcestic  ; 


"Thou  wouldst 
thy  name 

And  conversely  : 


have  chang'd  |  thy  face  ||  for  a  ndme,  \  or 
for  an  dss."—C.  of  E.  iii.  I.  47. 


"  It  would  make  \  a  man  mad  \  as  a  buck  ||  to  be  I  so  bought  I 
and  sold.  "—Ib.  72. 

There  are  often  only  five  accents. 

"  Bal.   G5od  meat,  sir,  |  is  common  :  |  that  e  |  very  churl  | 

affords. 

Ant.  E.   And  welcome  |  m5re  commSn  ;  |  for  that  |  is  no- 
thing |  but  words."—  Ib.  iii.  I.  24,  25. 

Sometimes  it  is  hard  to  tell  whether  the  verse  is  trisyllabic  with 
four  accents,  or  dissyllabic  with  five. 

"  Have  at  I  you  with  I  a  proverb—  I  Shall  I'  I  set  in  I  my  staff?" 

Ib.  51. 

may  be  scanned  with  six  accents,  but  the  line  to  which  it  rhymes 
seems  to  have  four  : 

"  And  so  |  tell  your  master.  |    O  Lord,  |  I  must  laugh," 

Ib.  50. 
and  the  following  line  also  : 

"  Have  at  you  |  with  another ;  |  that's  when  I  can  you  tell," 

Ib.  52. 
and  it  is  therefore  possible  that  we  ought  to  accent  thus  : 

"  Have  at  you  |  with  a  proverb —  |  Shall  I  set  I  in  my  staff?" 

503.  Apparent  trimeter  couplets.  Some  apparent  trimeter 
couplets  are  really  ordinary  dramatic  lines. 

For  example,  in  the  last  line  but  two  of  501  (M.  for  M.  v.  i.  51), 
"impossible"  may  easily  be  one  foot  with  two  superfluous  syllables. 
It  is  often  a  matter  of  taste  which  way  to  scan  a  line,  but  it  must 
be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  trimeter  couplet  is  rarely  used  to  ex- 
press intense  emotion.  Hence  in  an  impassioned  address  like  that 
of  Henry  V.  at  Harfleur,  we  should  probably  read 

"  Defy  us  j  to  our  worst :  |  for  as  |  I  am  |  a  soldier," 

Ilm.  V.  iii.  3.  5. 
or,  better  (479),  "for  as  'I'm  |  a  sol  |  dier." 

So     "  And  wel  |  come,    Somerset ;  |  I  hold  |  it  cow  |  ardice." 

2  Hen.  VI.  iv.  2.  7. 


VERSES.  409 

Or,  less  probably,  "  Somerset  "  may  have  two  accents  and 
"cowardice  "  (470)  one. 

"  Aschil  |  drenfrom  |  a  bear,  |  theVols  |  ces  shunning  him." 

Coriol,  i.  3.  34. 

"  So  lediousfy  \  away.  |  The  poor  |  condem  |  ned  E'nglish." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  Prol.  221  ;  but  ib.  28  is  a  trimeter  couplet. 
"  And  hugg'd  me  \  in  his  arm  |  and  kind  |  ly  kiss'd  |  my 

cheek."—  Rich.  III.  ii.  2.  24. 
"  Than  that  |  mix'd  in  |  his  che'ek.     |  'Twos  just  |  the   dif- 

f(e)rence."— A.  Y.  L.  Hi.  5.  122. 
"  He  is  ('s)  my  broth  I  er  too.   I  But  fitt  |  er  time  |  for  that." 

M.  for  M.  v.  i.  498. 
"  And  not  I  the  pun(i)sh  I  ment ;   therefore,  |  indeed  |  my 

father."— M.for  M.  i.  3.  39. 

The  following  are  doubtful,  but  probably  ordinary  lines  : 

"  I  know  him  \  as  w^self,  I  for  from  |  our  in  \fancy." 

T.  G.  of  V.  ii.  3.  62. 
Or  "infancy"  may  have  only  one  accent  (467). 

"  May  a  |  free  face,  |  put  on,  |  derive  |  a  liberty." 

W.  T.  i.  2.  112. 
"  Either"  may  be  a  monosyllable  (see  466)  in 

"  Your  sense  I  pursues  I  not  mine  :  I  either  you  |  are  Ignorant" 

M.for  M.  ii.  4.  74. 
"  For  in  |  equal(i)ty :  |  but  let  |  your  rea  |  son  serve." 

Ib.  v.  i.  65. 

In     "  Alexas  did  revolt  ;  and  went  to  Jewry  on 
Affairs  of  Antony," — A.  and  C.  iv.  6.  12. 

"on"  may  be  transposed  to  the  second  line;  or,  considering  the 
licence  attending  the  use  of  names  and  the  constant  dropping  of 
prefixes,  we  might  perhaps  read  "Alexas  |  did  (re)volt  |  ." 

In     "  Calls  her  |  a  non  |  pareil ;  |  I  ne  |  ver  saw  |  a  woman," 

Temp.  iii.  2.  108. 

though  it  is  against  Shakespearian  usage  to  pronounce  "non-parcil  " 
a  dissyllable,  as  in  Dorsetshire,  "a  nunprel  apple,"  yet  Caliban 
here  may  be  allowed  to  use  this  form.  I  believe  "  nonp'rel  type  " 
is  still  a  common  expression. 

Sometimes  an  exclamation,  as  "  O,"  gives  the  appearance  of  a 
trimeter  couplet  : 

"  For  the  |  best   hope  |  I  have.  |  (O,)   do    not    wish  |  one 

more." — Hen.   V.  iv.  3.  33. 
See  also  498  ad  fin. 


410  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

504.  The  verse  with  four  accents  is  rarely  used  by  Shake- 
speare, except  when  witches  or  other  extraordinary  beings  are  intro- 
duced as  speaking.  Then  he  often  uses  a  verse  of  four  accents 
with  rhyme. 

"Double,  |  double,  |  toil  and  |  trouble, 

Fire  |  burn  and  |  cauldron  j  bubble." — Macbeth,  iv.  I.  20. 
The  iambic  metre  in  such  lines  is  often  interchanged  with  the 
trochaic  : 

T      ,  .    »   \  "He  who  |  the  sword  |  of  heav'n  |  will  bear 

Should  be  |  as  ho  |  ly  as  |  severe  : 
T  «^W,>  i      Pattern  |  in  him  |  self  to  |  know, 

C  \     Grace  to  |  stand  and  |  virtue  |  go." 

M.forM.  iii.  2.  274-8. 

(The  last  line  means  "he  ought  to  have  grace  for  the  purpose  of 
standing  upright,  and  virtue  [for  the  purpose  of]  walking  in  the 
straight  path."  "Go"  is  often  used  for  "walk."  "To"  is  omitted 
before  "go.") 

Sometimes  in  the  same  couplet  we  find  one  line  iambic  and  the 
other  trochaic  : 

"  And  here  |  the  mai  |  den  sleep  I  ing  sound 

O'n  the  |  dank  and  |  dirty  |  ground."— M.  N.  D.  ii.  2.  74-5. 
It  would  be,  perhaps,  more  correct  to  say  that  both  lines  are 
trochaic,  but  in  one  there  is  an  extra  syllable  at  the  beginning,  as 
well  as  at  the  end.     So  apparently 

"  This  is  |  he  my  |  master  |  said, 
(De)spised  |  the  A  |  thenian  j  maid."— M.  N.  D.  72-3  : 

but  the  prefix  "de-"  might  (460)  be  dropped. 

So         "  (De)spised  |  in  na  |  tiv     i  |  t^ 

Shall  up  |  on  their  |  chi  dren  |  be."— Ib.  v.  i.  420. 
There  is  difficulty  in  scanning 

"  Pretty  |  soul,  she  |  durst  not  |  lie 
Near  this  lack-love,  this  kill-courtesy."— 70.  76-7. 

It  is  of  course  possible  that  "  kill-curt'sy  "  may  have  the  accent 
on  the  first :  but  thus  we  shall  have  to  accent  the  first  "  this  "  and 
"love"  with  undue  emphasis.  It  is  also  more  in  Shakespeare's 
manner  to  give  "courtesy"  its  three  syllables  at  the  end  of  a 
line.  I  therefore  scan 

"  (Near  this)  lack-love,  ]  this  kill  |  courte  |  sy." 

*  The  words  "iambic  "  and  "trochaic"  here  and  elsewhere  refer  to  accent, 
not  quantity. 


VERSES.  4" 

Perhaps,  however,  as  in  Macbeth,  in.  5.  34,  35,  and  ?  21,  a  verse 
of  five  accents  is  purposely  introduced. 

505.  Lines  with  four  accents  are,  unless  there  is  a  pause  in 
the  middle  of  the  line,  very  rare.  The  following,  however,  seem  to 
have  no  more  than  four  accents  : 

"Let's  each  |  one  send  |  unto  |  his  wife.  "-T.  of  Sh.  v.  2.  66. 
"No  worse  |  than  I'  |  upon  some  |  agreement." — Ib.  iv.  4.  33. 
"He  shall  |  you  find  J  ready  |  and  willing." — Ib.  34. 
"The  match  |  is  made,  |  and  all  |  is  done." — Ib.  46. 
"Go  fool,  I  and  whom  I  thou  keep'st  |  command." 

Ib.  ii.  \.  259. 

The  frequent  recurrence  of  these  lines  in  the  Taming  of  the  Shrew 
will  not  escape  notice. 

"  And  put  |  yourself  |  under  |  his   shrowd."     (?  corrupt.) 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  71. 
"  A  lad  I  of  life,  |  an  imp  I  of  fame." 

Hen.  V.  iv.  I.  45  (Pistol). 
"We  knew  not 

The  doc  |  trine  of  |  ill-doing,  |  nor  dream'd 
That  any  did."—  W.  T.  i.  2.  70. 
"Go  tell  I  your  cousin  I  and  bring  |  me  word." 

I  Hen.  IV.  v.  I.  109. 
"For  aught  I  I  know,  I  my  lord,  I  they  do." 

Rich.  II.  v.  I.  53. 
But  perhaps  the  lines  may  be  arranged  : 

"     Aunt.  For  aught  |  I  know, 

.Mv  lord,  I  they  do.  I 

York.  You  will  |  be  there,  |  I  know. 

Aunt.  If  God  |  prevent  |  (it)  not,  |  I  purpose  |  so." 
"  With  "  may  be,  perhaps  (457),   transposed  to  the  former  of  the 
following  verses,  thus  : 

"  With  ad  |  ora  |  tions,  fer  |  tile  te  |  ars,  (480)  ivith 
Groans  (484)  I  that  thiin  I  der  love,  I  with  sighs  |  of  fire." 

T.  N.  i.  5.  274. 

But  the  enumerative  character  of  the  verse  (509)  may  justify  it  as 
it  stands. 

It  is  difficult  to  scan 

"  Lock'd  in  her  monument.     She  had  a  prophesying  fear," 

A.  and  C.  iv.  14.  120. 
without  making  the  latter  portion  a  verse  of  four  accents. 


412  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

(Perhaps 

"Lock'd  in  |  her  mon(u)  |  ment     She'd  |  a  prophe  |  sying  fear," 
making  "sying"  a  monosyllable  like  "being,"  "doing."    See  470.) 

"Should  from  |  yond  cloud  |  speak  di  |  vine  things." 

Coriol.  iv.  5.  110. 
But  I  should  prefer 

"  If  Jupiter 

Should,  from  |  yond  cloud,  |  speak  di  I  vine  things  |  and  say 
'  'Tis  true,' —  |  (507)  I'd  not  |  believe  I  them  more 
Than  thee,  |  all-no  |  ble  Marcius." 

Shakespeare  would  have  written  "things  divine,"  not  "divine 
things"  at  the  end  of  a  verse.  (See  419,  at  end.) 

"Is  not  |  muchmiss'd  |  but  with  |  his  friends." — Coriol.  iv.  6. 13. 
"Before  |  the  kings  |  and  queens  |  of  France." 

I  Hen.   VI.  i.  6.  27. 
"And  even  |  these  three  |  days  have  |  I  watch'd." 

Ib.  i.  4.  16. 

"Here  through  |  this  gate  |  I  count  |  each  one."—  Ib.  60. 
"  Think  not  |  the  king  |  did  ban  |  ish  thee," 

Rich.  II.  i.  3.  279. 

is  not  found  in  the  Folio,  which  also  varies,  ib.  i.  3.  323 ;  iii.  7.  70. 
Perhaps 

"They  thus  |  direct  |  ed,   we  |  will  follow 
I'n    the  |  main   battle  |  whose    puissance  I  on    ei  I  ther 

side."— Rich.  III.  v.  3.  298. 

(But  the  second  line  is  harsh,  and  perhaps  part  of  it  ought  to 
be  combined  with  the  first  in  some  way.  "Puissance"  is  a  dis- 
syllable generally  in  Shakespeare,  except  at  the  end  of  the  line. 
I  know  no  instance  in  Shakespeare  where,  as  in  Chaucer, 
"battle"  is  accented  on  the  last.  Remembering  that  ed  is  often 
not  pronounced  after  /  and  d,  we  might  scan  the  first  line  thus,  with 
three  accents  : 

"They  thus  |  direct(ed),  |  we'll  follow.") 

If  "ed"  is  not  pronounced  (472)  in  "divided,"  that  may  explain 
"The  archdea  |  con  hath  |  divided  \\.."—\Hen.IV.  iii.  i.  72. 
The  following  may  seem  a  verse  of  four  accents  : 

"  Whereas  the  contrary  bringeth  bliss."— I  Hen.  VI.  v.  5.  64. 
But  "contrary"  is  found  in  Hamlet,  iii.  2.  221.  And  as  "country" 
(see  477)  is  three  syllables,  so,  perhaps,  "contrary"  is  four  : 


VERSES.  4'3 

"Whereas  |  the  cont  |  (e)rar  |  y  bring  |  eth  bliss." 
A  verse  of  four  accents  is  exceedingly  discordant  in  the  formal  and 
artificial  speech  of  Suffolk,  in  which  this  line  occurs. 

Somewhat  similarly,  Shakespeare  has  "cursorary"  for  "cursory  :" 
"  I  have  but  with  a  cnrsorary  eye." — Hen.   V.  v.  2.  77. 

In  "  Anthony  Woodville,  her  brother  there," — Rich.  HI.  i.  I.  67. 
"\\oodville"  is  probably  to  be  pronounced  a  trisyllable,  a  semi- 
vowel inserting  itself  between  the  d  and  v — "  Wood-e-ville."  The 
e  final  (see  488)  would  not  be  sounded  before  "her." 

"Valiant"  is  a  trisyllable  in 

"Young,   val  |  iant,  |  wise,   and  |  no  doubt  |  right  royal." 

Rich.  III.  i.  i.  245. 

506.  Lines  with  four  accents,  where  there  is  an  inter- 
ruption in  the  line,  are  not  uncommon,  it  is  obvious  that 

a  syllable  or  foot  may  be  supplied  by  a  gesture,  as  beckoning,  a 
movement  of  the  head  to  listen,  or  of  the  hand  to  demand  attention, 
as  in 

"lie's  ta'en.  |  \Sh6ut.]  \  And  hark,  |  they  shout  |  for  joy." 

J.  C.  v.  3.  32. 
"Kneel   thou  |  down,    Philip.  |    (Dubs  him   knight.)    |  But 

rise  |  more  great." — A'.  J.  i.  I.  161. 
"Marry  |  to (Enter-  athello.)  \  Come,  cap  |  tain,  will  | 

you  go?" — Othello,  i.  2.  53. 

Here,  however,  as  in 

"A  wise  I  stout  cap  |  (i)tain,  |  and  soon  |  persuaded." 

3  Hen.   VI.  iv.  7.  32. 
"Our  cap  |  (i)tains,  |  Macbeth  |  and  Ban  |  quo?     Yes." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  34. 
we  may  scan 

"Marry  |  to Come,  |  cap(i)  |  tain,  will  |  you  go," 

but  very  harshly  and  improbably. 

"  Cass.   Flatter  |  ers  !"    (Turns  t6  Brutus.)  \  Now,Bni  |  tus, 

thank  |  yourself."— y.  C.  v.  I.  45. 
An  interruption  may  supply  the  place  of  the  accent  : 

"And   falls  |  on  th'    6th  |  er (Enter    Lddy  Macbeth.}  \ 

How  now,  |  what  news?" — Macbeth,  i.  7.  28. 
The    interval    between    two    speakers    sometimes   justifies   the 
omission  of  an  accent,  even  in  a  rhyming  passage  of  regular  lines  : 


4H  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Fairy.  Are  not  |  you  he?  |  '  Puck.  \  Thou  speak'st  |  aright, 
I  am  I  that  mer  fry  wan  |  derer  of  |  the  night." 

M.  N.  D.  ii.  I.  42. 
" Mai.  As  thou  |  didst  leave  |  it.  ' Serg.  \  Doubtful  |  it  stood." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  7. 
"  Cass.   Messa  I  la  !    '  Mess.  \  What  says  |  my  gen  |  eral?" 

y.  c.  v.  i.  70. 

"Dun.   Who  comes  |  here?  '  Mai.  \  The  worth  |  y  thane  |    of 
Ross."— Macbeth  i.  2.  45. 

"Sic.   Without  |  assistance.  |    |  Men.   I  think  [  not  so." 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  33. 

The  break  caused  by  the  arrival  of  a  new-comer  often  gives  rise 
to  a  verse  with  four  accents. 

"Than  your  |  good  words.  |  '  j  But  who  |  comes  here?" 

Rich.  II.  ii.  3.  20. 
"Stands  for  |  my  bounty.  [  '  |  But  who  |  comes  here?" 

Ib.  67. 
"Against  |  their  will.  |  '  |  But  who  |  comes  |  here?" 

Ib.  iii.  3.  19. 
So,  perhaps,  arrange 

"High  be  our  thoughts  ! 
I  know  my  uncle  York  hath  power  enough 
To  serve  |  our  turn.  |  '  |  But  who  |  comes  here?" 

Ib.  iii.  2.  90. 

It  is  possible  that  in  some  of  these  lines  "comes"  should  be 
pronounced  "cometh."  "Words,"  "turn,"  and  "will"  might  be 
prolonged  by  485,  486. 

5C7.  Lines  with  four  accents  where  there  is  a  change 

Of  thought  are  not  uncommon.  In  some  cases  the  line  is  divided 
into  two  of  two  accents  each,  or  into  one  line  of  three  accents,  and 
another  of  one. 

(i)  Change  of  thought  from  the  present  to  the  future  : 

"  Haply  |  you  shall  |  not  see  |  me  more ;  |  or  if, 
A  mang  j  led  shadow.  |  '  |  Perchance  j  to-morrow 
You'll  serve  |  another  |  master." — A.  and  C.  iv.  I.  28. 
"I'll  send  |  her  straight  |  away.  |  '  |   To-morrow 
I'll'  to  |  the  wars:  [she  to  |  her  sing  |  le  sorrow." 

A.   W.  ii.  3.  313. 

"Fresh  kings  |  are  come  |  to  Troy.  |  '  |  To-m6rrow 
We  must  |  with  all  |  our  main  (  of  power  |  stand  fast." 

Tr.  and  Cr.  ii.  2.  272. 


VERSES.  415 

(2)   From  a  statement  to  an  appeal,  or  rice  versA : 

"You  have  |  not  sought  it.  |  '  |  Hcrw  comes  |  it  then?" 

'  I  Hen.  IV.  v.  i.  27. 

Unless  "comes"  is  "cometh."      See  506  at  end. 

"Lord  of  |  his  reason.  |  '  |  What  though  |  you  fled?" 

A.  and  C.  iii.  13.  4. 

(I  do  not  remember  an  instance  of  "re  |  ason."  See,  however,  479.) 

^  Perhaps     "Come   hith  |  er,   count.  |  '  |  Do  you  (a*  you)  know  \ 
these  women?" — A.  W.  v.  3.  165. 

But  possibly  : 

"  Come  hith  |  er,    cou  |  nt  (486).       D6  |  you    know  |  these 

women  ?  " 
"  But  sidy.  \    Here  comes  (Fol.)  |  the  gar  |  deners." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  24. 
("gardeners"  may  have  but  one  accent.) 

"Never  \  believe  \  me.  '  \  Both  are  |  my  kinsmen." 

Ib.  ii.  2.  111. 
The  pause  may  account  for 

"As  he  |  would  draw  it.  |  '  |  Long  stay'd  |  he  so." 

Hamlet,  ii.  I.  91. 

(As  ed  is   pronounced  after  i  and  u,   so   it   might  be   after  y   in 
"stayed,"  but  the  effect  would  be  painful.) 

"  Which  has  |  no  need  |  of  you. 

Begdne" 
is  the  best  way  of  arranging  A.  and  C.  iii.  II.  10. 

"And  leave  |  eighteen.  |  '  |  Aids,  poor  |  princess." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  i.  61. 
"A  princ  |  e's  courage.  |  '  |  Away,  \  I  prithee." 

Cymb.  iii.  4.  187. 
"Let  us  |  withdraw.  \  '  \  'Twill  be  |  a  storm." 

Lear,  ii.  4.  290. 
(3)  Hence  after  vocatives  : 

"  Titus,  |'|I  (am)'m  come  |  to  talk  |  with  thee." 

T.  A.  v.  2.  16. 
"  Gentle  \  men,    '  \  import  |  une  me  |  no  further." 

T.  of  Sh.  i.  i.  48. 

"  Gentle  \  men,  '  \  that  I'  |  may  soon  |  make  good."— Ib.  74. 
"  Gentle  I  men,  '  \  content  |  ye,  'I'm    |  resolved. "—Ib.  90. 
"  Gentle  \  men,  '  \  will  you  |  go  mus  |  ter  men?" 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  108. 


416  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  Gentle  \  men,  '  \  go  mus  |  ter  up  |  your  men." 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  118 
"Good  Mar  \  gartt.  \      Run  |  thee  to  |  the  parlour." 

M.  Ado,  iii.  r.  1. 
Either  a  pause  may  explain 

"But  tell  |  me,  '  |  is  young  |  George  Stan  |  ley  living?" 

Rich.  III.  v.  5.  9. 
or  "George  "  (485)  may  be  a  quasi -dissyllable. 

508.  A  foot  or  syllable  can  be  omitted  where  there  is  any 

marked  pause,  whether  arising  from  (l)  emotion,  (2)  antithesis,  or 
(3)  parenthesis,  or  (4)  merely  from  the  introduction  of  a  relative 
clause,  or  even  a  new  statement. 

(i)  "Were't  |  my  fitness 

To  let  |  these  hands  |  obey  |  my  blood,  |  — '  | 
They're  apt  |  enough  |  to  dis  |  locate  |  and  tear 
Thy  flesh  |  and  bones." — Lear,  iv.  2.  64. 

"O'  |  disloy  |  al  thing 

That  should'st  |  repair  |  my  youth,  |  — '  |  thou  heap'st 
A  year's  |  age  on  f  me.   — Cymb.  i.  I.  132. 

There  is  an  intended  solemnity  in  the  utterances  of  the  ghosts  in 

"Let  fall  |  thy  lance.  |  '  |  Despair  |  and  die." 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  143. 

and     "Think  on  |  lord  Hastings.  |  '  |  Despair  |  and  die." — Ib.  148. 

(2)  "Scarce  an  |  y  joy 

Did  ev  |  er  so  |  long  live.  |  '  |  No  sorrow 

But  kill'd  |  itself  |  much  soon  |  er."—  W.  T.  v.  3.  53. 

(3)  "  He  quit  I  his  fort  |  unes  here 
(Which  you  |  knew  great)  |  '  |  and  to  |  the  hazard." 

Ib.  iii.  2.  169. 

(4)  "Mark  what  |  I  say,  |  '  |  which  you  |  shall  find." 

M.forM.  iv.  3.  130. 
Perhaps  "Is  my  kins  |  man,  '  |  wh6m  \  the  king  |  hath  wrong'd," 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  114. 
in  a  very  irregular  passage,  part  of  which  is  nearly  prose. 

"Into  |  his  title  |  : which  \  (he    \  we  find."  \ 

i  lien.  IV.  iv.  3.  104. 
"That  she  |  did  give  me,  |  '  |  whose  po  |  sy  was." 

M.  of  V.  v.  i.  148. 

"Call  our  |  cares  fears,  |  '  |  -which  will  |  in  time." 

Coriol.  iii.  I.  137. 


YERSES.  417 

"Tis  sure  |  enough  |  — an  you  |  knew  h6w." 

T.  A.  iv.  I.  95. 

A  pause  may,  perhaps,  be  expected  before  an  oath,  as  in 

"As  you  |  shall  give  I  th'  advice.  |      By  |  the  fire 
That  quick  |  ens  E'  |  gypt's  slime."— A.  and  C.  i.  3.  68. 

(But  "vice"  or  "by"  may  be  prolonged.) 


That 


most  jeal  |  ous  and  |  too  doubt  |  ful  heart 


May  live     at  peace.  |  '  |  He  shall  |  conceal  it." 

T.  N.  iv.  3.  28  ;  Macbeth,  i.  5.  6. 
"To  watch,  |  poor  perdu  ! 

With  this  |  thin  helm.  |  '  |  Mine  ene  |  my's  dog, 
Though  he  |  had  bit  |  me,  should  |  have  stood  |  that  night 
Against  |  my  fire." — Lear,  iv.  .7.  36. 
"  Last  night  |  'twas  on  |  mine  arm.  |  '  |  I  kiss'd  it." 

Cymb.  ii.  3.  151. 
(Certainly  not  "  I  kiss  |  ed  it.") 

"  Would  then  |  be  nothing.  [  '  |  Truths  would  |  be  tales." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  2.  137. 
"Point  to  |  rich  ends.  |  '  |  This  my  |  mean  task." 

Temp.  iii.  I.  4. 
"  Must  give  |  us  pause  (484).  |  '  |  There's. the  |  respect." 

I  la  mid,  iii.  I.  68. 

509.  Lines  with  four  accents  are  found  where  a  number 
of  short  clauses  or  epithets  are  connected  together  in  one  line,  and 
must  be  pronounced  slowly  : 

"Earth  gapes,  hell  burns,  fiends  roar,  saints  pray." 

Kick.  III.  iv.  4.  75. 

"Witty,  courteous,  liberal,  full  of  spirit." 

3  Hen.   VI.  i.  2.  43. 

The  last  line  is  very  difficult.  "And,"  or  a  pause  equal  to 
"and,"  after  "witty,"  would  remove  the  difficulty. 

It  is  remarkable  that  Shakespeare  ventures  to  introduce  such 
a  line  even  in  a  rhyming  passage  : 

"  Youth,  beauty,  u'isdom,  courage,  all 
That  happiness  and  prime  can  happy  call." 

M.  for  M.  ii.  I.  184. 
"Ho  !   hearts,  |  tongues,  figures,  |  scribes,  bards,  |  poets  | 

cannot 

Think,  speak,  \  cast,  write,  \  sing  num  \  her,  ho! 
His  love  to  Antony." — A.  and  C.  iii.  2.  17. 
"  Is  goads,  thorns,  nettles,  tails  of  wasps."—  W.  T.  i.  2.  329. 
E  E 


4i 8  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

(Here,  however,  "goads"  and  "thorns"  may  be  prolonged.     See 

484,485-) 

"With  that  |  harsh,   no  |  ble,  sim  |  pie —  |  nothing." 

Cymb.  iii.  4.  135. 
The  following  occurs  amid  regular  verse  : 

"  These  drums  !  these  trumpets  !  flutes  !  what." 

A.  and  C.  ii.  7.  138. 
"  When  you  do  dance,  I  wish  you 
A  wave  of  the  sea,  that  you  might  ever  do 
Nothing  I  but  that;  I  move  still,  I  still  so." 

W.  T.  iv.  4.  142. 

Here  still,  which  means  "always,"  is  remarkably  emphatic,  and 
may,  perhaps,  be  pronounced  as  a  quasi-dissyllable.  So  "  til "  is  a 
monosyllabic  foot  in  CHAUCER,  C.  T.  1137. 

510.  Apparent  lines  of  four  accents  can  sometimes  be 

explained  by  giving  the  full  pronunciation  to  contractions,  such  as 
s  for  eth,  'd  for  ed,  'II  for  will,  've  for  have,  't  for  //,  &c.  ;  or  they  are 
lines  of  three  accents  with  a  detached  foot. 
" Silv.   What'j-  (is)  |  your  will?  | 
Prot.  That  I'  |  may  com  |  pass  yours." 

T.  G.  of  V.  iv.  2.  92. 
"And  were. |  the  king  |  on't  (of  it),  |  what  would  |  I  do?" 

Temp.  ii.  I.  145. 
"In  what  |  you  please.  |  'IV/  (will)  |  do  what  |  I  can." 

Ib.  iv.  4.  47. 
"  You've  add  |  ed  w6  \  rth  (485)  un  |  to  it  |  and  lustre." 

T.  of  A.  i.  2.  154. 
"  Drive  him  |  to  Ro  \  me ;  'f  (it)  |  is  time  |  we  twain." 

A.  and  C.  i.  4.  73. 
"  Whence  com  |  est  thou  ?  |  What   would  |  est  thou  ?  j  Thy 

name?" — Coriol.  iv.  5.  58. 

But  the  pauses  between  the  abrupt  questions  may  be  a  sufficient 
explanation. 

"And  ne'er  (nev  j  er)  a  |  true  one.  I    In  such  |  a  night." 

M.ofV.v.  i.  148. 

The  first  "a"  maybe   emphatic,  meaning  "one."     Else  508. 
"Our  thighs  |  packV  (ed)  |  with   wax,  |  our  mouths  |  with 

honey.  — 2  Hen.  IV.  iv.  5.  77. 

"So  much  |  as  Ian  j  kV  (ed)  not.  j  'Tis  pit  |  y  of  him." 

A.  and  C.  i.  4.  71. 


419 

"V  =  "his  "in 

"Vincent  |  io  |  's  (his)   son  |  brought   up  |  in   Florence." 

T.  of  Sh.  i.  i.  14. 
In     "  Sal.     My  lord,  I  long  to  hear  it  at  full," 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  2.  6. 

"hear"  is  a  dissyllable  (485),  or  "the"  omitted  after  "at."  Com- 
pare "atte"  in  E.  E.  for  "at  the." 

I  feel  confident  that  "but  would  "  must  be  supplied  in 

"  And  what  poor  duty  cannot  do,  noble  respect 
Takes  it  in  might,  not  merit,"— M.  N.  D.  v.  i.  91. 

and  we  must  read  : 

"And  what  poor  duty  cannot  do,  but  would, 
Noble  respect  takes  not  in  might  but  merit."* 

"  And,  ere  our  coming,  see  thou  shake  the  bags 
Of  hoarding  abbots  ;  imprisoned  angels 
Set  at  liberty.     The  fat  ribs  of  peace 
Must  by  the  hungry  now  be  fed  upon," — K.  J.  iii.  3.  8. 

ought  probably  to  be  arranged  : 

"  Of  hoarding  abbots  ; 
Imprisoned  angels  set  at  liberty. 
The  fat  ribs  of  peace 
Must,"  &c. 

Or  (Walker)  invert   "imprisoned   angels"  and  "set   at  liberty." 
Arrange  thus  : 

"  Your  Coriolanus 
Is  n6t  |  much  mlss'd, 

But  with  |  his  friends.  \  The  com  |  monwealth  |  doth  stand, 
And  so  |  would  do,  |  were  he  |  more  ang  |  ry  at  it. " 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  13. 
Similarly 

"  Most  cert  |  ain.     Sht  \  er,  welcome. 
Prdy  you  \  (see  512) 
Be  ev  |  er  known  |  to  pat  |  ience,   my  |  dear'st  sister." 

A.  and  C.  iii.  6.  97. 
So  arrange 

1 '  That  won  you  without  blows. 
Despising  (499), 
For  you,  the  city,  thus  I  turn  my  back." 

Coriol.  iii.  3.  133. 

*  I  think  I  have  met  with  this  conjecture  in  some  commentator. 
E    E    2 


420  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"      Cel.   Look,  who  |  comes  here?  | 

Silv.  Afy  err  \  and  is  \  to  you  : 

Fairyduth  (512),  | 
My  gent  |  le  Phoe'  |  be  bid  |  me  give  |  you  this. " 

A.   Y.  L.  iv.  3.  6. 
"  Got  'tween  \  asllep  \  and  wake. 
Well,  then  (512), 
Legit(i)  |  mate  E'd  |  gar,  I'  |  must  have  |  your  land." 

Lear,  i.  2.  15. 
' '  As  pearls  \  from  dia  \  nionds  drSpp'd. 

In  brief  ($11)." — Lear,  iv.  3.  24. 
Hen.  V.  ii.  Prologue,  32,  is  corrupt. 
' '  /  live  with  bread  like  you  : 

Feel  want,  taste  grief,  need  friends  :  subjected  thus, 
How  can  you  say  to  me  I  am  a  king?" — Rich.  II.  iii.  2. 175. 

511.  Single  lines  with  two  or  three  accents  are  fre- 
quently interspersed  amid  the  ordinary  verses  of  five  accents. 
They  are,  naturally,  most  frequent  at  the  beginning  and  end  of 
a  speech. 

These  lines  are  often  found  in  passages  of  soliloquy  where  passion 
is  at  its  height.  Thus  in  the  madness  of  Lear,  iv.  6.  112-29,  there 
are  eight  lines  of  three  accents,  and  one  of  two  ;  and  the  passage 
terminates  in  prose.  And  so  perhaps  we  should  arrange 

"  Would  use  his  heav'n  for  thunder  ;  nothing  but  thunder  ! 
Merciful  heaven  (512), 

Thou  rather  with  thy  sharp  and  sulphurous  bolt 
Split'st  the  unwedgeable  and  gnarled  oak 
Than  the  soft  myrtle. 
But  man,  proud  man, 
Drest  in  a  little  brief  authority,"  &c. 

M.forM.  ii.  2.  110-19. 
So  in  the  impassioned  speech  of  Silvius  : 

"  If  thou  remember'st  not  the  slightest  folly 
That  ever  love  did  make  thee  run  into, 
Thou  hast  not  loved,"— A.   Y.  L.  ii.  5.  36. 
which  is  repeated  in  1.  39  and  42. 

The  highest  passion  of  all  expresses  itself  in  prose,  as   in   the 
earful  frenzy  of  Othello,  iv.  I.  34-44,  and  Lear,  iv.  6.  130. 
Rarely  we  have  a  short  line  to  introduce  the  subject. 
"       York.    Then  thus: 
Edward  the  third,  my  lords,  had  seven  sons." 

2  Hen.  VI.  ii.  2.  9,  10. 


VERSES.  421 

"  Into  his  ruin'd  ears,  and  thus  deliver  : 
'  Henry  Bolingbroke, 

On  both  his  knees,' "  &.c.—Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  32. 
"      Ross.  (So)  That  now 
Sweno,  the  Norways'  king,  craves  composition." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  59. 
"For  Clot  en: 

There  wants  no  diligence  in  seeking  him." — Cymb.  iv.  3. 19. 

Sometimes  the  verse  (which  is  often  written  as  prose  in  the  Folio) 

closely  resembles  prose.     It  is  probable  that  the  letter  J.  C.  ii.  3. 

1-10  is  verse,  the  last  two  words,  "thy  lover,  Artemidorus,"  being 

irregular.     So  A.   Y.  L.  iii.  2.  268-74. 

The  irregular  lines  uttered  by  Cassius,  when  he  is  cautiously 
revealing  the  conspiracy  to  Casca,  looking  about  to  see  that  he  is 
not  overheard,  and  also  pausing  to  watch  the  effect  of  his  words  on 
Casca,  are  very  natural. 

' '  (  'nto  some  monstrous  state. 
Now  could  I,  Casca,  name  to  thee  a  man 
Most  like  this  dreadful  night, 
That  thunders,  lightens,  opens  graves,  and  roars." 

j.  c.  i.  3. 71-74. 

It  will  also  not  escape  notice  that  "now  could  I,  Casca,"  and 
"that  thunders,  lightens,"  are  amphibious  sections.  See  513. 

The  following  pause  may  be  explained  by  the  indignation  of 
Macduff,  which  Malcolm  observes  and  digresses  to  appease  : 

"  Why  in  that  rawness  left  you  wife  and  child 
Without  Ica-.'c -taking ? 
I  pray  you  (512) 
Let  not  my  jealousies  be  your  dishonours." 

Macbeth,  iv.  3.  28. 

A  pause  is  extremely  natural  before  Lear's  semi-confession  of 
infirmity  of  mind  : 

"  A'nd,  to  |  deal  plainly, 

1  fear  |  I  am  |  not  in  |  my  perf  |  ect  mind." 

Lfar,  iv.  7.  62. 

A  stage  direction  will  sometimes  explain  the  introduction  of  a 
short  line.  The  action  takes  up  the  space  of  words,  and  necessitates 
a  broken  line,  thus  : 

"  Macb.    This  is  a  sorry  sight.     [Looking on  his  hands.} 
Lady  M.   A  foolish  thought,  to  say  a  sorry  sight." 

Macbeth,  ii.  2.  21. 


422  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Mad>eth  may  be  supposed  to  draw  his  dagger  after  the  short  line: 

"As  this  |  which  now  |  I  draw."— Macbeth,  ii.  i.  41. 
So  after   Lady   Macbeth  has   openly  proposed   the  murder  of 
Duncan  in  the  words — 

"  Oh,  never 
Shall  sun  that  morrow  see"— Macbeth,  i.  $.  62. 

she  pauses  to  watch  the  effect  of  her  words  till  she  continues  : 
"  Your  face,  my  thane,  is  as  a  book  where  men,"  &c. 
The  irregular  lines  in  the  excited  narrative  of  the  battle — 

"  Like  valour's  minion,  carv'd  out  his  passage 

Till  ht  faced  the  slave" — Macbeth,  i.  2.  20  (so  ib.  51). 

are  perhaps  explained  by  the  haste  and  excitement  of  the  speaker. 
This  is  illustrated  by 

'*  Except  they  meant  to  bathe  in  reeking  wounds, 
Or  memorize  another  Golgotha, 
I  cannot  tell. 
But  I  am  faint,  my  wounds  cry  out  for  help." 

Macbeth,  i.  2.  41. 
In     "  As  cannons  overcharged  with  double  cracks  ;  ||  so  they  || 

Doubly  redoubled  strokes  upon  the  foe," — Ib.  \.  2.  37. 
there  may  be  an  instance  of  a  short  line.     But  more  probably  we 
must  scan  "  As  cannons  |  o'ercharged  |  ." 
Such  a  short  line  as 

"  Only  to  herald  thee  into  his  sight, 
Not  pay  Hue," — Macbeth,  i.  3.  103. 

is  very  doubtful.     Read  (though  somewhat  harshly)  : 

"Only  |  to  her(a)ld  (463)  |  thee  in  |  to 's  sight,  |  not  pay  thee." 
So     "  Let's  (us)  |  away  ;  j  our  tears  |  are  not  |  yet  breVd," 

Macbeth,  ii.  3.  l-Ji\  130. 

and  the  following  lines  must  be  arranged  so  as  to  make  1.  132  an 
interjectional  line. 
There  is  a  pause  after  "  but  let  "  in 
"  But  let— 
The  frame  |  of  things  J  disjoint,  |  both  the  |  worlds  suffer." 

Macbeth,  iii.  2.  16  ;  iv.  3.  l>7. 

and  in  the  solemn  narrative  preparatory  to  the  entrance  of  the  Ghost : 
"  Last  night  of  all, 
When  yond  same  star  that's  westward  from  the  pole." 

Hamlet,  i.  i.  35. 


VERSES.  423 

So     "  And  are  upon  the  Mediterranean  flote 
Bound  sadly  home  for  Naples, 
Supposing  that  they  saw  the  king's  ship  wreck'd." 

Temp.  i.  2.  235. 

So  M.  N.  D.  iii.  2.  49. 

"  Lastly, 

If  I  do  fail  in  fortune  of  my  choice 

Immediately  to  leave  you  and  be  gone." — M.ofV.  ii.  9.  14. 

"  Yet  I, 

A  dull  and  muddy-mettled  rascal,  peak." 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  593. 

"  I,  his  sole  son,  do  this  same  villain  send 
To  heaven:'— Ib.  iii.  3.  78. 

In         "Dost  thou  hear?"—  Temp.  i.  2.  106. 

"  thou  "  is   unemphatic,  and  scarcely  pronounced.      Or  else  these 

words  must  be  combined  with  the  previous,  thus  : 

"  Hence  his  |  ambit  |  ion  grow  |  — ing— Dost  |  thou  hear?" 

512.  Interjection^!  lines.  Some  irregularities  may  be  ex- 
plained by  the  custom  of  placing  ejaculations,  appellations,  &c. 
out  of  the  regular  verse  (as  in  Greek  $>«5,  &c.). 

"  Yes.  | 

Has  he  |  affections  in  him?" — M.for'M.  iii.  I.  107. 
"Alack 

I  love  myself.     Wherefore?  for  any  good?" 

.Rich.  III.  v.  3.  187. 

"  What, 
Are  there  no  posts  despatch'd  for  (480)  Ireland?" 

-Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  103. 

So  arrange 

"      North.    Why? 
I's  he  j  not  with  |  the  queen  ?  | 

Percy.  No,  my  I  good  lord." 

Ib.  ii.  3.  512. 
"  Fie, 
There's  no  such  man  ;  it  is  impossible." 

Othello,  iv.  2.  134. 

"  And  such  a  one  do  I  profess  myself, 
For,  sir, 
It  is  as  sure  as  you  are  Roderigo." 

Othello,  i.  i.  55  ;  Lear,  \.  I.  56. 


424  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

Perhaps  we  ought  thus  to  arrange 

"  O,  sir, 
Your  presence  is  too  bold  and  peremptory." 

I  Hen.  IV.  i.  3.  17. 

This  is  Shakespeare's  accentuation  of  "  peremptory." 

' '  Farewell.     [Exit  Banquo.  ] 

Let  every  man  be  master  of  his  time." — Macbeth,  iii.  I.  40. 
"  Sir, 

I  have  upon  a  high  and  pleasant  hill." — T.  of  A.  i.  I.  63. 
"  Sirrah, 

Get  thee  to  Flashy,  to  my  sister  Gloucester. " 

Rich.  II.  ii.  2.  90. 
So  Rich.  III.  i.  2.  226  ;  i.  4.  218. 
"  Great  king, 

Few  love  to  hear  the  sin  they  love  to  act."— P.  ofT.  i.  I.  91. 
"  My  dismal  scene  I  needs  must  act  alone. 

Come,  vial." — R.  and  J.  iv.  3.  20. 
"  Come,  Hastings,  help  me  to  my  lodging.     O  ! 

Poor  Clarence."— Rich.  III.  ii.  I.  133. 
' '  For  Hecuba  ! 

What's  Hec  |  uba  |  to  him,  |  or  he  |  to  Hecuba  (469)?" 

Hamlet,  ii.  2.  584. 
"If  thou  hast  any  sound  or  use  of  voice, 

Speak  to  me."—Ib.  i.  i.  129. 

So/*.   132,  135:  and  "  0  vengeance,"  ib.  610;  "A  scullion!"  ib. 
616. 

So  we  should  read 

"  I'll  wait  upon  you  instantly.  (Exeunt.}  [To  FLAV.]  Come  hither. 
Pray  you, 

How  goes,"  &C.—T.  of  A.  ii.  i.  36. 

Similarly  "  Nay,  more,"  C.  of  E.  i.  i.  16;  "Stay,"  T.  N.  iii.  I. 
149;  "  Who's  there?"  Hamlet,  i.  i.  1;  " Begone,"  J.  C.  i.  I.  57  ; 
"  O,  Casar,"  J.  C.  iii.  i.  281;  "Let  me  work,"  J.  C.  ii.  I.  209  ; 
"J/ere,  cousin,"  Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  182;  "  Whafs  she?"  T.  N.  i.  2.  35; 
"Draw,"  Lear,  ii.  i.  32  ;  "  Think,"  Coriol.  iii.  3.  49. 
So  arrange 

"  Viol.  Hold,  ||  there's  half]  my  coffer.  | 
Anton.  Will  you  |  deny  |  me  now?" 

T.  N.  iii.  4.  38. 
"So,  ||  I  am  sat  |  isfied,  |  give  me  |  a  b6wl  |  of  wine." 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  72. 


VERSES.  425 

"  Ratdiffe,  \\  about  |  the  mid  |  of  night  |  come  to  |  my  tent." 

Rich.  III.  77,  209. 

The  excitement  of  Richard  gives  rise  to  several  interjectional  lines 
of  this  kind  in  this  scene. 

A  short  line  sometimes  introduces  a  quotation  : 

"  If  Caesar  hide  himself,  shall  they  not  whisper, 

Lo,  Ciesar  is  afraid?"— J.  C.  ii.  2.  101. 
"  Did  scowl  on  gentle  Richard.     No  man  cried 

'God  save  him.' "—Kick.  II.  v.  2.  28. 

Perhaps  we  should  arrange  as  follows  : 

"  He'll  spend  that  kiss 
Which  is  my  heaven  to  have. 
Come  \applying  the  asp  to  her  bosoni\ 
Thou  mortal  welch, 

With  thy  sharp  teeth  this  knot  intrinsicate 
Of  life  at  once  untie." — A.  and  C.  v.  2.  306. 

This  seems  better  than  scanning  the  words  from  "which"  to 
"wretch"  as  one  line,  either  (i)  as  an  ordinary  line,  with  "come, 
thou  mor  |  tal  wretch,"  or  (2)  as  a  trimeter  couplet,  making 
'•come  "  a  dissyllable. 

So  it  is  better  to  arrange  : 

"  Buckingham  i 

I  prithee  pardon  me 

That  I  have  giv'n  no  answer  all  this  while. " 

2  Hen.  VI.  v.  I.  32. 

Merely  with  a  special  view  to  mark  a  solemn  pause  Shakespeare 

writes  : 

"  So,  as  a  painted  tyrant  Pyrrhus  stood, 
And,  like  a  neutral  to  his  will  and  matter, 
Did  nothing. 

But,  as  we  often  see,"  &c. — Hamlet,  ii.  2.  504. 
Such  irregularities  are  very  rare. 

"  Sirrah, 

A  word  with  you.     Attend  those  men  our  pleasure  ?" 
is  the  right  way  to  arrange  Macb.  iii.  i.  45,  46.     Shakespeare  could 
not  possibly  (as  Globe)  make  "  our  pleasure  "  a  detached  foot. 
The  ejaculation  seems  not  a  part  of  the  verse  in 

"  I  lath  seiz'd  |  the  waste  |  ful  king.  [  [O,j  what  pit  |  y  is  it." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  4.  55. 


426  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"  And  he  |  himself  |  no 
See  also  498,  at  end  ;  503. 


"  And  he  I  himself  I  not  present.  |    [O,]  forefend  |  it,  God  ! 

Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  129. 


513.  The  Amphibious  Section.  When  a  verse  consists 
of  two  parts  uttered  by  two  speakers,  the  latter  part  is 
frequently  the  former  part  of  the  following  verse,  being, 

as  it  were,  amphibious — thus  : 

"S.  The  E'ng  |  lish  force,  |  so  please  you.|| 
M.    Take  thy  \face  hence.  ||  Seyton,  |  I'm  sick  |  at  heart." 

Macbeth,  v.  3.  19. 

"  M.  News,  my  |  good  lord,  |  from  Rome.  || 
Ant.  Grates  me:  \  the  si'im.  \ 

Cleo.  Nay,  hear  |  them,  A'n  |  tony."— A.  and  C.  i.  I.  19. 
"B.  Who's  there?  | 
M.  A  friend.  || 
B.    What,  sir,  \  not  yet  \  atrlst?\\  The  king's  |  abed." 

Macbeth,  ii.  I.  10. 
"  Kent.  This  off  |  ice  to  you.|| 

Gent.  I'  will  \  talk  fur  \  ther  -with  ||  you.  || 

Kent.  No,  |  do  not."— Lear,  iii.  I.  42. 

"  Gent.  Which  twain  |  have  brought  |  her  to.|| 
Edg.  Hail,  gent  \  le  sir.  \ 

Gent.   Sir,  speed  |  you,  what's  |  your  will  ?  " 

Lear,  iv.  6.  212. 
"  Prosp.   Against  |  what  should  |  ensue.  || 

Mir.  How  cdme  \  we  ashSre  ?  \\ 

Prosp.  By  Pro  |  vidence  |  divine." 

Temp.  \.  2.  158. 

"  Cland.   And  hug  |  it  in  |  my  arms.  || 
Is.  There  spake  \  my  br6  \  ther,  ||  there  |  my  fa  |  ther's  grave." 

M.forM.  iii.  I.  86. 
"  E.  How  fares  |  the  prince  ?  || 

Mess.    Well,  mdd  \  am,   dnd  \  in  health.  ||  Duck.  What  is  | 
thy  news,  then?" — Rich.  III.  ii.  4.  40. 

"Brut.  That  6th  |  er  men  |  begin.  || 
Cas.    Then  leave  \  him  6ut.  ||  Casca.  Indeed  |  he  is  |  not  fit." 

J.  C.  ii.  I.  153. 
Probably— 

"  Macb.  And  break  it  |  to  our  hope.  j|  I  will  \  not  fight  \  withthte.\ 
Macd.  Then  yield  |  thee,  coward.  "—Macbeth,  v.  8.  22. 


VERSES.  427 

Compare  also  Macbeth,  i.  4.  43,  44  ;  ii.  3.  75, 101-2;  iii.  I.  18  19,  2. 
12-13,  4.  12,  15,  20,  151  ;  J.   C.  ii.  4.   16,  17  ;  CorioL  iii.  2.  6  ; 
Othello,  iii.  3.  282,  &c. 
In  the  following  instance  the  first  "  still  "  is  emphatic  : 

"  Oliv.  As  howl  |  ing  aft  |  er  music.  || 
Duke.  Stlll\so  cni\\el! 

Olw.  Still  I  so  con  |  stant,  lord." 

T.  N.  v.  i.  113. 

Sometimes  a  section  will,  on  the  one  side,  form  part  of  a  regular 
line,  and,  on  the  other,  part  of  a  trimeter  couplet. 

"  Hor.   Of  mine  I  own  eyes.  ||  Mar.  fs  it  \  not  like  \  the  king?  || 

Hor.   As  thou  [  art  to  |  thyself. "  —Hamlet,  i.  I.  58,  59. 
"  Ophel.   In  hon  |  oura  |  ble  fashion.  |   Pol.  Ay,fdsh  \  ionydu  \ 

may  cdllit.  ||   Go  to,  go  to." — Ib.  i.  3.  112. 
Ham.  No,  it  |  is  struck.    ||   Hor.  Indeed,  \  I  heard  \  it  n6t ;  || 

then  it  |  draws   near  |  the  season. — Ib.  i.  4.  4. 
In  the  last  example,  "indeed,"  when  combined  with  what  follows, 
is  a  detached  interjection  (512). 

514.  Interruptions  are  sometimes  not  allowed  to  inter- 
fere with  the  completeness  of  the  speaker's  verse. 

This  is  natural  in  dialogue,  when  the  interruption  comes  from  a 
third  person  : 

"  Polon.  Pray  you  |  be  round  |  with  him.  | 

(Ham.  \_Within\  Mother,  mother,  mother!) 
Queen.  I'll  war  |  rant  you." 

Hamlet,  iii.  4.  5,  6. 

Or,  when  a  man  is  bent  on  continuing  what  he  has  to  say  : 

"      Ham.   Rashly — and  that  should  teach  us 
There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Rough-hew  them  how  we  will — 
(Hor.  That's  certain.) 
Ham.  Up  from  my  cabin,"  &c. 

Hamlet,  v.  2.  11,  12. 
"  Shy.  This  is  (461)  kind  |  I  offer— 
(Bass.  This  were  kindness.) 
Shy.  This  kind  |  ness  will  I  I  show." 

M.  ofV.  i.  3.  143. 
"  KintrR.   Ratcliffe—  | 
(Rat.   My  lord.) 

King R.  The  sun  I  will  not  |  be  seen  |  to-day." 

Rich.  III.  v.  3.  281. 


428  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

"Brutus.   Away,  |  slight  man.  | 
( Cassius.   Is't  possible  ?) 

Brutus.  Hear  me,  |  for  I'  |  will  speak. " 

y.  C.  iv.  3.  37,  38. 

Or,  when  a  speaker  is  pouring  forth  his  words,  endeavouring  to 
break  through  the  obstacle  of  unintelligence,  as  Kent  trying  to  make 
himself  intelligible  to  the  mad  Lear : 

"Kent.  No,  my  I  good  lord ;  |  I  am  |  the  ver  |  y  man— 

(Lear.   Fll  see  that  straight. ) 

Kent.   That  from  |  your  first  |  of  dif  |  ference  and  |  decay 
Have  foil  |  ow'd  your  |  sad  steps,  |  — 

(Lear.  You're  welcome  hither. ) 
Kent.  Nor  n6  |  man  else. " 

i.e.  "I  and  no  one  else."  Then,  in  despair  of  making  himself 
understood,  Kent  continues  : 

"All's  cheerless,  dark,  and  deadly." 

Sometimes  the  interlocutor's  words,  or  the  speaker's  continuation, 
will  complete  the  line  : 

"  Ctzsar.   So  much  |  as  lank  |  ed  not.  |    (Folio  has  lanKd.} 
Lep.  'Tis  pit  j  y  of  him. 

Casar.  Let  his  |  shames  quickly."— A.  and  C.  i.  4.  71. 
If  there  are  two  interlocutors,  sometimes  either  interlocution  will 
complete  the  line  : 

"  Gent.  Than  is  |  his  use.  | 

Widow.  Lord,  how  I  we  lose  |  our  pains  ! 

Helena.  All's  well  |  that  ends  |  well  yet. " 

A.  W.  v.  I.  24,  25. 

"  Bru.   Good  Marc  |  ius  |  home  |  again.  | 
Sic.  The  ve  I  ry  trick  on't. 

Men.  This  is  |  unlikely." 

Coriol.  iv.  6.  71. 

515.  Rhyme.  Rhyme  was  often  used  as  an  effective  termina- 
tion at  the  end  of  the  scene.  When  the  scenery  was  not  changed, 
or  the  arrangements  were  so  defective  that  the  change  was  not 
easily  perceptible,  it  was,  perhaps,  additionally  desirable  to  mark 
that  a  scene  was  finished.  The  rhyme  in  T.  N.  ii.  2.  32  is  perhaps 
a  token  that  the  scene  once  concluded  with  these  lines,  and  that  the 
nine  lines  that  follow  are  a  later  addition. 

Rhyme  was  also  sometimes  used  in  the  same  conventional  way, 
to  mark  an  aside,  which  otherwise  the  audience  might  have  great 


VEKSES.  429 

difficulty  in  knowing  to  be  an  aside.  Thus,  in  a  scene  where  there 
are  no  other  rhyming  lines,  Queen  Margaret  is  evidently  intended 
to  utter  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  16,  17  ;  20,  21,  as  asides,  though  there  is 
no  notice  of  it.  One  of  the  lines  even  rhymes  with  the  line  of 
another  speaker : 

"  Q.  Eliz.  When  didst  thou  sleep,  when   such  a  deed  was 

done? 
Q.  Marg.  When  holy  Harry  died,  and  my  sweet  son. " 

Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  24,  25. 

Queen  Margaret  does  not  show  herself  till  line  35,  as  also  in 
Rich.  III.  \.  3.  till  line  157,  though  in  the  latter  scene  the  asides  do 
not  rhyme. 

515  a.  Prose.  Prose  is  not  only  used  in  comic  scenes  ;  it  is 
adopted  for  letters  (M.  of  V.  iv.  I.  149-66),  and  on  other  occasions 
where  it  is  desirable  to  lower  the  dramatic  pitch  :  for  instance,  in  the 
more  colloquial  parts  of  the  household  scene  between  Volumnia  and 
Virgilia,  Coriol.  \.  3,  where  the  scene  begins  with  prose,  then  passes 
into  verse,  and  returns  finally  to  prose.  It  is  also  used  to  express 
frenzy,  Othello,  iv.  I.  34—44  ;  and  madness,  Lear,  iv.  6.  130  ;  and 
the  higher  flights  of  the  imagination,  Hamlet,  \\.  2.  310-20. 


SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR. 

'  516.  Similarity.— In  order  to  describe  an  object  that  has 
not  been  seen  we  use  the  description  of  some  object  or  objects 
that  have  been  seen.  Thus,  to  describe  a  lion  to  a  person  who 
had  never  seen  one,  we  should  say  that  it  had  something 
like  a  horse's  mane,  the  claws  of  a  cat,  &c.  We  might  say, 
"  A  lion  is  like  a  monstrous  cat  with  a  horse's  mane."  This 
sentence  expresses  a  likeness  of  things,  or  a  similarity. 

517.  Simile.— In  order  to  describe  some  relation  that  can- 
not be  seen,  e.g.  the  relation  between  a  ship  and  the  water, 
as  regards  the  action  of  the  former  upon  the  latter,  to  a 
landsman  who  had  never  seen  the  sea  or  a  ship,  we  might 
say,  "  The  ship  acts  upon  the  water  as  a  plough  turns  up  the 
land."     In  other  words,  "The  relation  between  the  ship  and 
the  sea  is  similar  to  the  relation  between  the  plough  and  the 
land."     This  sentence  expresses  a  similarity  of  relations, 
and  is  called  a  simile.     It  is  frequently  expressed  thus  : 

"  As  the  plough  turns  up  the  land,  so  the  ship  acts  on  the 
sea." 

Def.  A  Simile  is  a  sentence  expressing  a  similarity  of 
relations. 

Consequently  a  simile  is  a  kind  of  rhetorical  proportion, 
and  must,  when  fully  expressed,  contain  four  terms  : 
A    :    B    ::    C    :    D. 

518.  Compression  of  Simile  into  Metaphor.— A  simile  is 
cumbrous,  and  better  suited  for  poetry  than  for  prose.    More- 
over, when  a  simile  has  been  long  in  use,  there  is  a  tendency 
to  consider  the  assimilated  relations  not  merely  as  similar 
but  as  identical.     The  simile  modestly  asserts  that  the  re- 


SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR.  43* 

lation  between  the  ship  and  the  sea  is  like  ploughing.  The 
compressed  simile  goes  further,  and  asserts  that  the  relation 
between  the  ship  and  the  sea  is  ploughing.  It  is  expressed 
thus  :  "  The  ship  ploughs  the  sea." 

Thus  the  relation  between  the  plough  and  the  land  is 
transferred  to  the  ship  and  the  sea.  A  simile  thus  com- 
pressed is  called  a  Metaphor,  i.e.  transference. 

Def.  A  Metaphor  is  a  transference  of  the  relation  be- 
tween one  set  of  objects  to  another,  for  the  purpose  of 
brief  explanation. 

519.  Metaphor  fully  stated  or  implied.— A  metaphor  may 
be  either  fully  stated,  as  "  The  ship  ploughs  (or  is  the  plough 
of]  the  sea"  or  implied,  as  " The  winds  are  the  horses  that 
draw  the  plough  of  the  sea."     In  the  former  case  it  is  dis- 
tinctly stated,  in  the  latter  implied,  that  the  "  plough  of  the" 
sea  "  represents  a  ship. 

520.  Implied  Metaphor  the  basis  of  language.— A  great 
part  of  our  ordinary  language,  all  that  relates  to  the  relations 
of  invisible  things,  necessarily  consists  of  implied  metaphors; 
for  we  can  only  describe  invisible  relations   by  means   of 
visible  ones.     We  are  in  the  habit  of  assuming  the  existence 
of  a  certain  proportion  or  analogy  between  the  relations  of 
the  mind   and   those  of  the   body.      This   analogy  is   the 
foundation    of  all  words   that   express    mental    and   moral 
qualities.      For   example,  we    do   not  know  how  a  thought 
suggests  itself  suddenly  to  the  mind,  but  we  do  know  how 
an  external  object  makes  itself  felt  by  the  body.     Experience 
teaches  us  that  anything  which  strikes  the  body  makes  itself 
suddenly  felt.     Analogy  suggests  that  whatever  is  suddenly 
perceived  comes  in  the  same  way  into  contact  with  the  mind. 
Hence  the  simile— "As  a  stone  strikes  the  body,  so  a  thought 
makes  itself  perceptible  to  the  mind."     This  simile  may  be 
compressed  into  the/"//  metaphor  thus,  "The  thought  struck 
my  mind,"  or  into  the  implied  metaphor  thus,  "  This  is  a 


432  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

striking  thought."  In  many  words  that  express  immaterial 
objects  the  implied  metaphor  can  easily  be  traced  through 
the  derivation,  as  in  "  excellence,"  "  tribulation,"  "  integrity," 
"  spotlessness,"  &c. 

N.B.  The  use  of  metaphor  is  well  illustrated  in  words 
that  describe  the  effects  of  sound.  Since  the  sense  of  hear- 
ing (probably  in  all  nations  and  certainly  among  the  English) 
is  less  powerful  and  less  suggestive  of  words  than  the  senses 
of  sight,  taste,  and  touch,  the  poorer  sense  is  compelled  to 
borrow  a  part  of  its  vocabulary  from  the  richer  senses. 
Thus  we  talk  of  "  a  sweet  voice,"  "  a  soft  whisper,"  "  a  sharp 
scream,"  "  a  piercing  shriek,"  and  the  Romans  used  the 
expression  "  a  dark-coloured  voice,"*  where  we  should  say 
"  a  rough  voice." 

*  521.  Metaphor  expanded.— As  every  simile  can  be  com- 
pressed into  a  metaphor,  so,  conversely,  every  metaphor  can 
be  expanded  into  its  simile.  The  following  is  the  rule  for 
expansion.  It  has  been  seen  above  that  the  simile  consists 
of  four  terms.  In  the  third  term  of  the  simile  stands  the  sub- 
ject ("  ship,"  for  instance)  whose  unknown  predicated  rela- 
tion ("action  of  ship  on  water")  is  to  be  explained.  In 
the  first  term  stands  the  corresponding  subject  ("  plough  ") 
whose  predicated  relation  ("action  on  land")  is  known.  In 
the  second  term  is  the  known  relation.  The  fourth  term  is 
the  unknown  predicated  relation  which  requires  explanation. 
Thus— 


the  plough 
Known  subject. 


turns  up  the  land, 
Known  predicate. 


the  ship 

Subject  whose 

predicate  is 

unknown. 


acts  on  the  sea. 

Unknown 
predicate. 


Sometimes  the  fourth  term  or  unknown  predicate  may  re- 
present something  that  has  received  no  name  in  the  lan- 
guage. Thus,  if  we  take  the  words  of  Hamlet,  "  In  my 
mind's  eye,"  the  metaphor  when  expanded  would  become — 

*  "Voxfusca." 


SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR. 


433 


is  enlightened  by  the 

so 

the  mind 

is  enlightened   by 

eye, 

a  certain  percep- 

tive faculty. 

Subject 

Known  predicate. 

whose 
predicate 

is  un- 

Unknown predi- 
cate. 

known. 

As  J        the  body 


Known  subject. 


For  several  centuries  there  was  no  word  in  the  Latin 
language  to  describe  this  "  perceptive  faculty  of  the  mind." 
At  last  they  coined  the  word  "  imaginatio,"  which  appears 
in  English  as  "  imagination."  This  word  is  found  as  early 
as  Chaucer  ;  but  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  the  English  lan- 
guage should,  like  the  Latin,  have  passed  through  its  best 
period  without  any  single  word  to  describe  the  "  mind's  eye." 

522.  The  details  of  the  expansion  will  vary  according  to 
the  point  and  purpose  of  the  metaphor.     Thus,  when  Mac- 
beth  (act  iii.  sc.  i)    says  that   he   has   "  given   his   eternal 
jewel   to  the   common   enemy   of  man,"   the   point   of  the 
metaphor  is  apparently  the  pricelessness  of  a  pure  soul  or 
good  conscience,   and  the  metaphor    might  be    expanded 
thus — 

"  As  a  jewel  is  precious  to  the  man  who  wears  it,  so  is 
a  good  conscience  precious  to  the  man  who  possesses  it." 

But  in  Rich.  II.  i.  i.  180,  the  same  metaphor  is  expanded 
with  reference  to  the  necessity  for  its  safe  preservation  :— 

"  A  jewel  in  a  ten-times  barr'd-up  chest 
Is  a  bold  spirit  in  a  loyal  breast." 

523.  Personal  Metaphor. — There  is  a  universal  desire 
among  men  that  visible  nature,  e.g.  mountains,  winds,  trees, 
rivers  and  the  like,  should  have  a  power  of  sympathising  with 
men.     This  desire  begets  a  kind  of  poetical  belief  that  such 
a  sympathy  actually  exists.    Further,  the  vocabulary  express- 
ing the  variable  moods  of  man  is  so  much  richer  than  that 
which  expresses  the  changes  of  nature  that  the  latter  bor 
rows  from  the  former.     Hence  the  morn  is  said  to  laugh, 
mountains  to  frown,  winds  to.  whisper^  rivulets  to  prattle, 

F  F 


434  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

oaks  to  sigh.     Hence  arises  what  may  be  called  Personal 
Metaphor. 

Def.  A  Personal  Metaphor  is  a  transference  of  personal 
relations  to  an  impersonal  object  for  the  purpose  of  brief 
explanation. 

524.  Personal  Metaphors  expanded.— The  first  term  will 
always  be  "a  person; "the  second,  the  predicated  relation 
properly  belonging  to  the   person    and    improperly  trans- 
ferred to  the  impersonal  object;  the  third,  the  impersonal 
object.    Thus— 

"  As  a  person  frowns,  so  an  overhanging  mountain  (looks 
gloomy). 

"  As  a  child  prattles,  so  a  brook  (makes  a  ceaseless  cheerful 
clatter)." 

525.  Personifications. — Men  are  liable  to  certain  feelings, 
such  as  shame,  fear,  repentance  and  the  like,  which  seem 
not  to  be  originated  by  the  person,  but  to  come  upon  him 
from  without.     For  this  reason  such  impersonal  feelings  are 
in  some  languages  represented  by  impersonal  verbs.      In 
Latin  these  verbs  are  numerous,  "  pudet,"  "  piget,"  "  taedet," 
"pcenitet,"  "libet,"  &c.     In  Early  English  they  were  still 
more  numerous,   and  even   now   we  retain   not    only   "  it 
snows,"    "it  rains,"  but  also   (though    more   rarely)    "  me- 
thinks,"  "msseems,"  "  it  shames  me,"  "  it  repents  me."    Men 
are,  however,  not  contented  with  separating  their  feelings 
from  their  own  person ;  they  also  feel  a  desire  to  account 
for  them.    For  this  purpose  they  have  often  imagined  as  the 
causes  of  their  feelings,  Personal  Beings,  such  as  Hope,  Fear, 
Faith,  &c.    Hence  arose  what  may  be  called  Personification. 

In  later  times  men  have  ceased  to  believe  in  the  personal 
existence  of  Hope  and  Fear,  Graces  and  nymphs,  Flora 
and  Boreas  ;  but  poets  still  use  Personification,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  setting  before  us  with  greater  vividness  the  invisible 
operations  of  the  human  mind  and  the  slow  and  impercep- 
tible processes  of  inanimate  nature. 


SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR.  435 

Def.  Personification  is  the  creation  of  a  fictitious 
Person  in  order  to  account  for  unaccountable  results,  or 
for  the  purpose  of  vivid  illustration. 

526.  Personifications  cannot  be   expanded.— The  pro- 
cess of  expansion  into  simile  can  be  performed  in  the  case 
of  a  Personal  Metaphor,  because  there   is    implied  a  com- 
parison between  a  Person  and  an  impersonal  object.     But 
the   process  cannot   be   performed    where  (as  in  Personifi- 
cations) the  impersonal  object  has  no  material  existence,  but 
is  the  mere  creation   of  the   fancy,  and  presents  no  point 
of  comparison.     "  A  frowning  mountain  "  can  be  expanded, 
because  there  is  implied  a  comparison  between    a  moun- 
tain and  a  person,  a  gloom  and  a  frown.     But  "frowning 
Wrath"   cannot  be   expanded,    because   there   is   no   com- 
parison. 

It  is  the  essence  of  a  metaphor  that  it  should  be  literally 
false,  as  in  "  a  frowning  mountain."  It  is  the  essence  of  a 
personification  that,  though  founded  on  imagination,  it  is 
conceived  to  be  literally  true,  as  in  "  pale  fear,"  "  dark  dis- 
honour." A  painter  would  represent  "  death"  as  "  pale,"  and 
"  dishonour"  as  "dark,"  though  he  would  not  represent  a 
"  mountain"  with  a  "  frown,"  or  a  "  ship"  like  a  "  plough." 

527.  Apparent  Exception.— The  only  case  where  a  simile 
is  involved  and  an  expansion  is  possible  is  where  a  person, 
as  for  instance  Mars,  the  God  of  War,  is  represented  as 
doing  something  which  he  is  not  imagined  to  do  literally. 
Thus  the  phrase  "  Mars  mows  down  his  foes  "  is  not  literally 
true.     No  painter  would  represent  Mars  (though  he  would 
Time)  with  a  scythe.     It  is  therefore  a  metaphor  and,  as 
such,  capable  of  expansion  thus  : — 

''  As  easily  as  a  haymaker  mows  down  the  grass,  so  easily 
does  Mars  cut  down  his  foes  with  his  sword." 

But  the  phrase  "  Mars  slays  his  foes"  is,  from  a  poet's  or 
painter's  point  of  view,  literally  true.  It  is  therefore  no 
metaphor,  and  cannot  be  expanded. 


436  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

528.  Personification  analysed.— Though  we  cannot  ex- 
pand a   Personification   into   a  simile,  we  can  explain  the 
details  of  it.     The  same  analogy  which  leads  men  to  find  a 
correspondence  between  visible  and  invisible  objects  leads 
them    also   to  find  a   similarity  between  cause  and    effect. 
This  belief,  which  is  embodied  in  the  line — 

"  Who  drives  fat  oxen  should  himself  be  fat," 
is  the  basis  of  all  Personification.  Since  fear  makes  men 
look  pale,  and  dishonour  gives  a  dark  and  scowling  expres- 
sion to  the  face,  it  is  inferred  that  Fear  is  "  pale,"  and  Dis- 
honour "  dark."  And  in  the  same  way  Famine  is  "  gaunt ;" 
Jealousy  "green-eyed;"  Faith  "pure-eyed;"  Hope  "white- 
handed." 

529.  Good  and  bad  Metaphors.— There  are  certain  laws 
regulating  the    formation  and   employment   of   metaphors 
which  should  be  borne  in  mind. 

(i.)  A  metaphor  must  not  be  used  unless  it  is  needed  for 
explanation  or  vividness,  or  to  throw  light  upon  the  thought 
of  the  speaker.  Thus  the  speech  of  the  Gardener,  Rich.  II. 
iii.  4.  33,— 

"  Go  then,  and  like  an  executioner 
Cut  off  the  heads  of  our  fast-growing  sprays,"  &c. 

is  inappropriate  to  the  character  of  the  speaker,  and  conveys 
an  allusion  instead  of  an  explanation.  It  illustrates  what  is 
familiar  by  what  is  unfamiliar,  and  can  only  be  justified  by 
the  fact  that  the  gardener  is  thinking  of  the  disordered  con- 
dition of  the  kingdom  of  England  and  the  necessity  of  a 
powerful  king  to  repress  unruly  subjects. 

(2.)  A  metaphor  must  not  enter  too  much  into  detail :  for 
every  additional  detail  increases  the  improbability  that  the 
correspondence  of  the  whole  comparison  can  be  sustained. 
Thus,  if  King  Richard  (Rich.  II.  v.  5.  50)  had  been  content, 
while  musing  on  the  manner  in  which  he  could  count  time 
by  his  sighs,  to  say— 

"  For  now  hath  Time  made  me  his  numbering  clock," 


SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR.  437 

there  would  have  been  little  or  no  offence  against  taste. 
But  when  he  continues — 

"My  thoughts  are  minutes,  and  with  sighs  they  jar 
Their  watches  on  unto  mine  eyes,  the  outward  watch, 
Whereto  my  finger,  like  a  dial  s  point, 
Is  pointing  still,  in  cleansing  them  from  tears. 
Now,  sir,  the  sound  that  tells  what  hour  it  is 
Are  clamorous  groans  which  strike  upon  my  heart, 
Which  is  the  bell,"— 

we  have  an  excess  of  detail  which  is  only  justified  because  it 
illustrates  the  character  of  one  who  is  always  "  studying  to 
compare,"*  and  "hammering  out"  unnatural  comparisons. 

(3.)  A  metaphor  must  not,  be  far-fetched  nor  dwell  upon 
the  details  of  a  disgusting  picture  : 

"  Here  lay  Duncan, 
His  silver  skin  laced  with  his  golden  blood  ; 

there  the  murderers 

Steep'd  in  the  colours  of  their  trade,  their  daggers 
Unmannerly  brcecti d  with  gore  " — Macbeth,  ii.  3.  117. 

There  is  but  little,  and  that  far-fetched,  similarity  between 
gold  lace  and  blood,  or  between  bloody  daggers  and  breecttd 
legs.  The  slightness  of  the  similarity,  recalling  the  greatness 
of  the  dissimilarity,  disgusts  us  with  the  attempted  compari- 
son. Language  so  forced  is  only  appropriate  in  the  mouth  of 
a  conscious  murderer  dissembling  guilt. 

(4.)  Two  metaphors  must  not  be  confused  together,  par- 
ticularly if  the  action  of  the  one  is  inconsistent  with  the 
action  of  the  other. 

It  may  be  pardonable  to  surround,  as  it  were,  one  meta- 
phor with  another.  Thus,  fear  may  be  compared  to  an  ague- 
fit,  and  an  ague-fit  passing  away  may  be  compared  to  the 
overblowing  of  a  storm.  Hence,  "  This  ague-fit  of  fear  is 
overblown  "  (Rich.  II.  iii.  2.  190)  is  justifiable.  But 

"  Was  the  hope  drunk 
Wherein  you  dressed  yourself?     Hath  it  slept  since  ?" 

iMacbcth,  i.  7.  3C. 

*  "  I  have  been  studying  hmt<  I  may  compare 
This  prison  where  1  live  unto  the  world  ; 

I  cannot  do  it ;  yet  I'll  hammer  it  out"— Rich.  II.  v.  5.  1. 


438  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

is,  apart  from  the  context,  objectionable  ;  for  it  makes  Hope 
a  person  and  a  dress  in  the  same  breath.  It  may,  however, 
probably  be  justified  on  the  supposition  that  Lady  Macbeth 
is  playing  on  her  husband's  previous  expression — 

"  I  have  bought 

Golden  opinions  from  all  sorts  of  people, 
Which  would  be  worn  now  in  their  newest  gloss, 
Not  cast  aside  so  soon." 

(5.)  A  metaphor  must  be  wholly  false,  and  must  not  com- 
bine truth  with  falsehood. 

"  A  king  is  the  pilot  of  the  state,"  is  a  good  metaphor. 
"  A  careful  captain  is  the  pilot  of  his  ship,"  is  a  bad  one.  So 

"  Ere  my  tongue 

Shall  wound  mine  honour  with  such  feeble  wrong, 
Or  sound  so  base  a  parle," — Rich.  If.  L  I.  190. 

is  objectionable.  The  tongue,  though  it  cannot  "  wound," 
can  touch.  It  would  have  been  better  that "  honour's  "  enemy 
should  be  intangible,  that  thereby  the  proportion  and  the  per- 
fection of  the  falsehood  might  be  sustained.  Honour  can  be 
wounded  intangibly  by  "  slander's  venom'd  spear  "  (Rich.  II. 
i.  i.  171)  ;  but,  in  a  metaphor,  not  so  well  by  the  tangible 
tongue.  The  same  objection  applies  to 

"Ten  thousand  bloody  crowns  of  mothers'  sons 
Shall  ill-become  the  flower  of  England's  face, 
Change  the  complexion  of  her  maid-pale  peace 
To  scarlet  indignation,  and  bedew 
Her  pastures'  grass  with  faithful  English  blood." 

Rich.  II.  iii.  3.  96. 

If  England  is  to  be  personified,  it  is  England's  blood,  not 
the  blood  of  ten  thousand  mothers,  which  will  stain  her  face. 
There  is  also  a  confusion  between  the  blood  which  mantles 
in  a  blush  and  which  is  shed  ;  and,  in  the  last  line,  instead 
of  "England's  face,"  we  come  down  to  the  literal  "pas- 
tures' grass." 

(6.)  Personifications  must  be  regulated  by  the  laws  of 
personality.  No  other  rule  can  be  laid  down.  But  ex- 
aggerations like  the  following  must  be  avoided  : — 


SIMILE  AND  METAPHOR.  439 

"  Comets,  importing  change  of  times  and  states, 
Hrandish  your  crystal  tresses  in  the  sky, 
And  with  them  scourge  the  bad  revolting  stars." 

i  Hen.  VI.  i.  1.2. 

The  Furies  may  be  supposed  to  scourge  their  prostrate 
victims  with  their  snaky  hair,  and  comets  have  been 
before  now  regarded  as  scourges  in  the  hand  of  God. 
But  the  liveliest  fancy  would  be  tasked  to  imagine  the 
stars  in  revolt,  and  scourged  back  into  obedience  by  the 
crystal  hair  of  comets. 


NOTES  AND   QUESTIONS:* 

MACBETH,  ACT  III. 
SCENE  i. 

LINE 

3.   "  Thou //#y '<&/  most  foully  for't."     Expand  the  metaphor  into 
its  simile.     (Grammar,  521.) 

14.  "And  all-  thing  unbecoming."   See  "All"  (Grammar).    What 

is  there  remarkable  in  this  use  of  all?     Comp.  iii.  2.  11 — 
"Things  without  all  remedy." 

15.  "A  solemn  supper."     Modernize.     Trace  the  present  meaning 

from  the  derivation.     Compare 

"  A  solemn  hunting  is  in  hand." — T.  A.  ii.  I.  112. 
17.    "  To  the  which. "     What  is  the  antecedent  to  the  which  ?    Why 
do  we  say  the  which,  but   never  the  who  ?     (Grammar, 
"Which,"  270.) 

25.   "  The  better."   When  do  we  add  tfu  to  a  comparative  ?   (Gram- 
mar, 94.)     Can  the  be  explained  here? 
44.    "fFXtothen."     (See  137.)     Compare 

' '  He  shall  conceal  it 
Whiles  you  are  willing  it  shall  come  to  note." 

T.  N.  iv.  3.  29. 
Illustrate  from  Greek  and  Latin. 

49.    "To  be  thus  thus  is  nothing  but  to  be  safely  thus. "    Explain  the 

grammatical  construction  of  the  last  clause.      (See  385.) 
51.    "  Which  -would  be  feared. "    Modernize  would.    Explain  (Gram- 
mar, 329)  the  Elizabethan  usage. 

"Tismnch&dbro."  Is  there  any  object  to  "he  dares"?  (244.) 
*  The  numbers  refer  to  the  paragraphs  of  the  Grammar. 


NOTES  AND  -QUESTION'S.  44' 

LINE 

52.    "And  to  that  dauntless  temper  of  his  mind."     Meaning  of? 

(See  Grammar,  "To.") 
54.    "  None  but  he."     Illustrate  this  construction  by  Shakespeare's 

use  of  except.     (See  Grammar,  "But.") 

56.  "...   And,  under  him, 

My  genius  is  rebuked  ;  as,  it  is  said, 
Mark  Antony's  was  by  Caesar." 

See  A.  and  C.  ii.   3.  20—30.      Trace    the    meaning   of 

geitius  from  its  derivation. 
65.    "For  Banquo's  issue  have  I  filed  my  spirit."     Meaning  of? 

Give  similar  instances  of  the  dropping  of  the  prefix.     (See 

Prosody,  460.) 
72.    "  Champion  me  to  the  utterance."     Meaning  of?    Trace  the 

meaning  of  champion  and  utterance  from  the  derivation. 

What  historical  inference  may  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that 

both  these  words  are  derived  from  the  French  ?    Mention  a 

similar  inference  contained  in  the  dialogue  between  Gurth 

and  Wamba  in  "  Ivanhoe." 

75.    "  So  phase  your  highness."     Parse  please.     (See  297.) 
81.    "How  you  were  borne  in  hand,  howcross'd,  the  instruments." 

Is  this  an  Alexandrine  ?    (See  Prosody,  468  ;  and  compare 

"  My  books  and  instruments  shall  be  my  company." 

T.  ofSh.  i.  i.  82.) 

"  Like  labour  with  the  rest,  where  the  other  instruments." 

Coriol.  i.  i.  104. 
' '  /.  But  now  thou  seem'st  a  coward. 

P.  Hence,  vile  instrument." — Cymb.  iii.  4.  75. 

*' Borne  in  hand. "     Meaning? 

"The  Duke 

Bore  many  gentlemen,  myself  being  one, 
hi  hand  and  hope  of  action." — M.  for  M.  i.  4.  52. 
We  do   not   now   say   "to  bear  in  hope,"   but    "to   keep   a 
person   in   hope,    suspense,"    &c.      So   a   rich   hypocrite, 
pretending  illness  to  squeeze  presents  out  of  his  expectant 
legatees,  is  said  to — 

"  Look  upon  their  kindness,  and  take  more 
And  look  on  that,  still  bearing  them  in  hand, 
Letting  the  cherry  knock  against  their  lips." 

B.  J.  Fox,  i.  r.  init. 


442  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

We  still  say,  to  "bear  in  mind,"  but  we  generally  use  "a 
hand  "  in  this  sense. 

83.  "To  half  a  soul  and  to  a  notion  crazed."     Meaning  of  notion 

here  ?     Compare 

"His  notion  weakens,  his  discertiings 
Are  lethargkd." — Lear,  i.  4.  248. 

Trace  the  double  meaning  of  the  word  from  the  derivation. 

84.  "  M.   Say  'Thus  did  Banquo.'     Murd.  You  made  it  known 

to  us."     Scan.    (866454.) 

87.  "Your  patience  so  predominant  in  your  nature."     Scan. 

88.  "  Are  you  so  gospell'd  to  pray  for  this  good  man."   Modernize. 

(See  282.) 

91.    "J/.  And  beggar'd  yours  for  ever.     Murd.  We  are  men,  my 
liege."     Scan. 

95.  "The  valued  file. "  Trace  this  and  other  meanings  of  file 
from  the  derivation.  Explain  the  meaning  and  use  of 
valued  (374).  Could  we  say  "a  valued  catalogue?" 

99.  ' '  The  gift  which  bounteous  nature  hath  in  him  closed. "  Parse 
dosed.  (See  460.)  Compare 

"  Dance,  sing,  and  in  a  well-mixed  border 
Close  this  new  brother  of  our  order." — ROWLEY. 

What  is  now  the  difference  between  "  I  have  him  caught," 
and  "I  have  caught  him  "  ?    Compare 

"  And  when  they  had  .this  done."—  St.  Luke  v.  6. 

loo.    "  Particular  addition  from  the  bill  that  writes  them  all  alike." 

Meaning  of  from  ?     (See  Prepositions.) 
103.    "  Not  in  the  worst  rank  of  manhood,  say't."   Scan.    (See  485.) 

108.    "Who  wear  our  health  but  sickly  in  his  life 

IVhich  in  his  death  were  perfect.     Murd.   I  am  one,   my 
liege." 

What  is  the  antecedent  to  which  ?     Scan  the  second  line. 

112.  "So  weary  with  disasters,  tugged  with  fortune."  Parse  and 
explain  tugged.  How  does  the  meaning  differ  from  the 
modern  meaning  ?  Compare 


.VOTES  AND  QUESTIONS.  443 

LINE 

"  Both  tugging  to  be  victors,  breast  to  breast." 

3  Hen.  VI.  ii.  5.  12. 

and,  for  the  construction  : 

"And,  tuiTtiwith  works  of  war,  retired  himself 
To  Italy."— Rich.  II.  iv.  I.  96. 

113.    "That  I  would  set  my  life   on  any   chance."     Expand  the 
metaphor.     Compare 

"  Who  sets  me  else  ?    By  heaven  I'll  throw  at  all." 

Rich.  II.  iv.  i.  57. 

1 1 6.  "  And  in  such  bloody  distance, 

That  every  minute  of  his  being  thrusts 
Against  my  near'st  of  life." 

Expand  the  metaphor.      What  is  meant  by  "my  near'st  of 
life  ?  "     Illustrate  by  "  home-thrust,"  and  oiiceTos. 

1 20.  "And  bid  my  will  avouch  it."     Trace  the  meaning  from  the 

derivation. 

121.  "  For  certain  friends."     Meaning  of  for  here?     How  did  for 

become  a  conjunction  ? 

122.  "  Whose  loves  I  may  not  drop."     What  is  the  meaning  of 

may  ?     Derive  the  modern  from  the  original  meaning. 

123.  "  But  wail  his  fall 
Who  I  myself  struck  down." 

What  is  the  antecedent  to  who  ?  What  is  there  remarkable  in 
the  sentence?  (Gram.  274.) 

127.  "  Perform  what  you  command  us.     First  Murd.   Though  our 

lives — " 

What  do  you  suppose  the  First  Murderer  intended  to  say  ? 
Why  did  Macbeth  interrupt  him  ? 

128.  "Your  spirits  shine  through  you.    Within  this  hour  at  most.' 

Scan. 

130.    "The  perfect  spy  of  the  time."  Apparently  in  this  difficult  pas- 
sage spy  is  put  for  "  that  which  is  spied,"   "  knowledge." 

132.    "Always  thought."    Parse  thought.     Illustrate  the  construc- 
tion from  Greek.* 

"From  the  palace."     From,  how  used? 
*  Liddell  and  Scott :  ionw,  ii.  4. 


444  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

LINE 

138.    " I'll  come  to  you  anon.     We  are  resolved,  my  lord." 

Perhaps  ' '  t'  you  anon  "  is  to  be  considered  as  one  foot. 
If  not,  how  can  this  verse  be  scanned?  (See  500.)  What 
is  the  emphatic  word  in  the  Murderer's  reply? 

SCENE  2. 

3.  "  Say  to  the  king,  I  "would  attend  his  leisure."  Modernize  the 
latter  words.  Trace  the  different  meanings  of  attend  from 
the  derivation.  What  is  the  exact  meaning  of  would? 

9.  "  Lady  M.  'Tis  safer  to  be  that  which  we  destroy 

Than  by  destruction  dwell  in  doubtful  joy. 

Enter  MACBETH. 

How  now,  my  lord  !     Why  do  you  keep  alone?" 
Illustrate  the  character  of  Lady  Macbeth  from  her  words 
before  and  after  the  entrance  of  her  husband.     Why  and 
when,  for  the  most  part,  does  Shakespeare  use  rhyme  ? 
II.   "With  them  they  think   on.      Things  without  all  remedy." 
Scan.  What  is  the  object  of  on  ?    (See  242.)    How  is  all 
used? 

16.  "But  let  the  frame  of  things  disjoint,  both  the  worlds  suffer." 
Perhaps  a  pause  is  intended  after  "let  :"  "But  let — yes, 
even  the  frame,"  &c.  In  that  case  "But  let  "  is  an  un- 
finished verse,  and  the  rest  is  a  complete  verse.  In  the 
Fol.  1623  the  first  line  ends  with  "disjoint,"  containing 
four  accents.  When  does  Shakespeare  use  verses  \t\i\\four 
accents  (505-9)? 

19.  "That  shake  us  nightly;  better  be  with  the  dead."  Scan. 
How  can  you  justify  an  accent  on  the  first  syllable  in  the 
foot  "better?" 

21.  "  Than  on  the  torture  of  the  mind  to  lie 

In  restless  ecstasy.     Duncan  is  in  his  grave. " 

What  suggested  the  expression  ' '  to  lie  on  the  torture  of  the 
mind"?  Trace  this,  as  well  as  the  modern,  meaning  of 
ecstasy  from  the  derivation.  Compare 

"Where  violent  sorrow  seems 
A  modern  ecstasy." — Macbeth,  iv.  3.  170. 


NOTES  AND  QUESTIONS.  445 

UNI: 

Give  instances  of  classical  words  restricted  in  meaning  by 
modern,  compared  with  Elizabethan,  usage.  (See  Introduc- 
tion.) Scan  the  latter  line. 

27.  "  Gentle  my  lord."  Explain  and  illustrate  the  position  of  my. 
(See  13.) 

29.  "  Be  bright  and  jovial  among  your  guests  to-night. "   Trace  the 

meaning  from  the  derivation.  Give  words  similarly  derived. 
Scan. 

30.  "Let  your  remembrance  apply  to  Banquo."    Scan.     (See  Pro- 

sody, 477.) 

38.    "Nature's  copy."     Meaning  of?    Comp.  T.  N.  i.  5.  257  : 

"  'Tis  beauty  truly  blent  whose  red  and  white 
Nature's  own  sweet  and  cunning  hand  laid  on." 

40.  "  Ere  the  bat  hath  flown 

His  cloister' d flight." 

'    What  is  alluded  to? 

42.  "  The  shard-borne  beetle."  Shard  is  scale.  Ben  Jonson  talks  of 
"scaly  beetles  with  their  habergeons."  And  in  Cymb.  iii. 
2.  20,  "The  sharded  beetle  "  is  opposed  to  "  the  full- 
winged  eagle. " 

46.    "Seeling  night."    To  seel  was  "  to  close  the  eyelids  of  hawks 

partially  or  entirely  by  passing  a  fine  thread  through  them  ; 

sitter,    Fr.       This  was  done  to  hawks  till  they  became 

tractable. " — NARES. 
48.    "  Cancel  and  tear  to  pieces  that  great  bond."  Comp.  Rich.  III. 

iv.  4.  77  :  "  Cancel  his  bond  of  life."  Macbeth  iv.    I.   99  : 

"  Shall  live  the  lease  of  nature."     And — 

"  Through  her  wounds  doth  fly 
Life's  lasting  date  from  c a ncell 'd  destiny. " — R.  of  L. 

Explain  the  meaning  of  the  expression  here,  and  trace  the 
meaning  of  cancel  from  the  derivation. 
54.    "  Hold  thee  still."     Modernize.     (See  20.) 

SCENE  3. 
3,  4.  "  To  the  direction  just."     Meaning  of  to?     (See  187.) 

5.   "  Now  spurs  the  lated  traveller  apace. "    Modernize.     Illustrate 
by  similar  instances  the  shortening  of  the  word. 


446  SPIAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

INE 

10.  "Within  the  note  of  expectation.       This  may  perhaps  mean, 

"the  memorandum  or  list  of  expected  guests."     Compare 
"I  come  by  note"—M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  140. 
"That's  out  of  my  note."—  IV.  T.  iv.  3.  49. 

Otherwise    it    may      mean    "the    boundary,"     "limit." 

Compare 

"Within  the  prospect  of  belief." — Macbeth,  i.  3.  74. 

SCENE  4. 

I.  "  Sit  down  :  at  first 

And  last  the  hearty  welcome." 

Compare  I  Hen.  VI.  v.  5.  102  : 

"Ay  grief  I  fear  me  both  at  first  and  last" 
Meaning  of?     What  distinction  is  now  made  between  first 
and  at  first,  last  and  at  last  ?  f 

5.  "  Our  hostess  keeps  her  state,  but  in  best  time 

We  will  require  her  welcome. " 

Show,  from  the  antithesis  implied  in  but,  what  is  meant  by 

' '  keeping  her  state. "     Compare 

"  The  king  caused  the  queene  to  keepe  the  estate,  and 
then  sate  the  ambassadors  and  ladies,  as  they  were 
marshalled  by  the  king,  who  would  not  sit,  but  walked 
from  place  to  place  making  cheare." — HOLINSHED, 
quoted  by  CLARK  and  WRIGHT. 

The  "state  "  was  used  technically  to  mean  "a  canopy." 

11.  "Be  large  in  mirth."     Modernize.     Illustrate  from  largess. 

12.  "The  table  round.     There's  blood  upon  thy  face.     M.  'Tis 

Banquo's  then. "  What  name  has  been  given,  and  why,  to 
this  arrangement  of  the  parts  of  verses?  Compare  lines  15, 
20,  51,  69,  which  are  similarly  arranged.  (See  Prosody, 
513.) 

13.  "'Tis  better  thee  without  than  he  within."    Meaning?     Com- 

ment on  the  syntax.     (See  206,  212.) 

23.    "  As  broad  andgeneral  as  the  casing  air."    Compare  2  Hen.  VI. 
v.  2.  43  : 

"  Now  let  the  general  trumpet  blow  his  blast." 


NOTES  AND  QUESTIONS.  447 

LINE 

Meaning  of  general  ?    Modernize.     What  is  the  difference 
between  "  general,"  "  universal,"  and  "  common  "  ? 

34.  "The  feast  is  sold 

That  is  not  often  vouch'd,  while  'tis  a-making, 

'Tis  given  with  welcome  :  to  feed  were  best  at  home." 

Analyse  the  sentence,  and  show  the  confusion  of  two  con- 
structions.    Whence  arose  the  use  of  a,  as  in  a-making  ? 
(See  140. )     Scan  the  last  line. 
36.    "  From  thence."     Meaning  of?     (See  158.) 

42.  "  Who  may  I  rather  challenge  for  unkindness."  Is  who 
always  used  for  whom  ?  Whence  arises  the  difference 
between  may,  in  "may  I  challenge,"  as  here,  and  "  I  may 
challenge  "  ? 

57.  "You  shall  offend  him."  Modernize.  What  is  the  present 
rule  for  the  use  of  shall  with  respect  to  the  second  and 
third  persons?  How  did  the  rule  arise  ?  (See  317.) 

61.  "  This  is  the  very  painting  of  your  fear."  Modernize.  Trace1 
from  the  derivation  the  Elizabethan  meaning,  and  hence 
the  modern  meaning,  as  in  "  His  very  dog  deserted  him." 

64.   "Impostors  to  true  fear."     Meaning  of  to ?    (See  187.) 

66.    "  Authorized  by  her  grandam."     Compare  for  the  accent— 

"  His  madness  so  with  his  authorized  youth." — L.  C.   15. 
*'  Authorizing  thy  trespass  with  compare." — Sonn.  35.* 

75.  "  Ere  human  statutes  purged  the  gentle  weal."  How  is  gentle 
used  ?  If  the  weal  was  already  gentle,  how  did  it  require 
to  be  purged? 

79.  "  The  times  have  been 

7//a/,  when  the  brains  were  out,  the  man  would  die. " 

Modernize  that.     Illustrate  this  use.     (See  284. ) 
Si.    "  With  twenty  mortal  murders  on  their  crowns. "    Why  twent\ •  ? 
(See  above,  line  27.) 

87.  "  To  those  that  know  me.  Come,  love  and  health  to  all."  Scan 
this  and  the  previous  line. 

*  Neither  of  these  passages  is  conclusive,  as  authorize  coming  at  the  beginning 
of  the  verse  may  have  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable.     Add  there/ore : 
"His  rudeness  so  with  his  authorized  yo\\l\\." — L.  C.  15. 


448  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

LINE 

91.  "  We  thirst."  Thirst  is  not  used  elsewhere  by  Shakespeare  in 
the  sense  of  "  drinking  a  health."  [ ?  "first."] 

95.  "Thou  hast  no  speculation  in  those  eyes."  Illustrate  from 
this  use  of  speculation  the  general  difference  between  the 
Elizabethan  and  the  modern  use  of  classical  words. 
(See  Introduction.) 

98.  "  Only"     Probably  transposed.     (See  Grammar,  420.) 

99.  "What  man  dare."     Why  not  dares  ?     Compare 

"  Let  him  that  is  no  coward 
But  dare  maintain." — i  Hen.  VI.  ii.  4.  32. 

(Dare  occurs  thus  three  times  in  the  unhistorical  plays,  dares 
thirty  times.  In  the  historical  plays  dare  eight,  dares  seven 
times.) 

105.  "  If  trembling  I  inhabit,  then  protest  me."     No  other  instance 

has  been  given  where  inhabit  means  "linger  at  home." 
Shakespeare  may,  however,  have  derived  this  use  of  the 
word  from  olnovpfiv  ("  to  be  a  stay-at-home "  as  opposed 
to  "going  out  to  war")  through  NORTH'S  Plutarch,  190  : — 

"  The  home-tarriers  and  house-doves,"  &c. 
Trace  this  and  the  modern  meaning  of  protest  from  the 
derivation.     Comp.  M.  Ado,  v.  i.  149  : 

"  I  will  protest  your  cowardice." 

106.  "The  baby  oj  a  girl."     Baby  was  sometimes  used  for  "  doll :  " 

"  And  now  you  cry  for't 
As  children  do  for  babies  back  again." 

B.  and  F.  (HALLIWELL). 

109.    "You  have  displaced  the  mirth,  broke  the  good  meeting." 
What  is  here  contrary  to  common  usage  ?     (See  343. ) 

1 12.  "  You  make  me  strange 

Even  to  the  disposition  that  I  cnve. " 

Comp.  C.  ofE.  ii.  2.  151  : 

"  As  strange  unto  your  town  as  to  your  talk." 
Owe  is  frequently  used  for  ow(e)n,  as  ope  for  open.      Cornp. 
debeo  from  de  and  habeo. 

122.   Why  does  not  Lady  Macbeth  continue  her  expostulations  when 
she  is  alone  with  her  husband? 


NOTES  AND  QUESTIONS.  449 

LINE 

124.    "Augurs  and  understood  relations. "  Comp.  below,  iv.  3.  173  : 

"O,  relation 
Too  nice,  and  yet  too  true." 

The  utterances  of  birds  are  apparently  called  relations. 
126.    "  What  is  the  night  ?"     Illustrate  this  use  of  what.    (866252.) 

129.  "  Did  you  send  to  him,  sir?"  Why  does  Shakespeare  here 
make  Lady  Macbeth  thus  address  her  husband  ? 

133.  "  And  betimes  I  will  to  the  weird  sisters. "  This  line  must  pro- 
bably be  scanned  by  pronouncing  weird  as  two  syllables. 
(See  Prosody. )  In  the  Folio  weird  is  spelt  weyard.  Comp. 
ii.  i.  20  : 

"  I  dreamt  last  night  of  the  three  weird  sisters. " 
138.    "Returning  were  as  tedious  as  go  o'er."     Parse  returning  and 

g°- 

141.  "  You  lack  the  season  of  all  natures,  sleep."  Illustrate  from  this 
and  other  passages  the  practical  and  unimaginative  cha- 
racter of  Lady  Macbeth,  as  contrasted  with  her  husband. 
Compare  with  this  v.  I.  Compare  also  ii.  2.  67  :  "A  little 
water  clears  us  of  this  deed  ;"  and  v.  I.  35  :  "Yet 
here's  a  spot,"  and,  in  the  same  scene,  "What,  will  these 
hands  ne'er  be  clean  ?"  In  what  sense  may  such  lines  as 
ii.  2.  67,  iii.  4.  141,  be  called  specimens  of  "irony"? 
Compare  also  Duncan  speaking  of  the  first  (not  of  the 
second]  Thane  of  Cawdor  : 

"There's  no  art 

To  find  the  mind's  construction  in  the  face. 
He  was  a  gentleman  on  whom  I  built 
An  absolute  trust." — i.  4.  11. 

In  the  same  scene,  1.  58,  Duncan  says  of  Macbeth,  "It  is 
a  peerless  kinsman." 

Other  instances  of  Shakespearian  "irony"  may  be  found 
in  Rich.  III.  iii.  2.  67;  Coriol.  iii.  i.  19 ;  I  Hen.  II'. 
ii.  4.  528,  compared  with  2  Hen.  IV.  v.  5.  51  ;  A.  and  C. 
i.  2.  32,  compared  with  Ib.  v.  2.  330,  T.  of  A.  i.  2.  92, 
Rich.  III.  \.  2.  112,  and  Ib.  iv.  I.  82;  Macbeth,  ii.  3. 
97-100,  and  Ib.  v.  2.  22  ;  Rich.  III.  iii.  I.  110. 

G   G 


450  SHAKESPEARIAN  GRAMMAR. 

SCENE  5. 

LINE 

i.  Why  does  Shakespeare  make  the  witches  speak  in  a  different 
metre  from  the  rest  of  the  play  ?  Illustrate  from  the  Mid- 
summer Night's  Dream  and  the  Tempest. 

7.  "  Close  contriver  of  all  harms."  Meaning  of  close?  Comp. 
Cymb.  iii.  5.  85  :  "  Close  villain,  I'll  have  thy  secret." 

II.  "All  you  have  done 

Hath  been  but  for  a  wayward  son." 

Illustrate    this    from    Lady   Macbeth's  description  of    her 
husband,  i.   5.     Contrast  the  character  of  Macbeth  with 
that  of  Richard  III. 
24.    ' '  There  hangs  a  vaporous  <\\v\) profound. "    Perhaps  mysterious. 

32-  "  And  you  all  know  security 

Is  mortals'  chiefest  enemy." 

Trace  the  modern  meaning  of  secttrity  from  the  derivation. 
What  does  it  mean  here?   Illustrate  from  Milton's  Allegro. 


SCENE  6. 
2.    "  Only  I  say. "     Probably  transposed  as  above. 

4.  "  Was  pitied  of  Macbeth."  Modernize.  Account  for  this  use 
of  of. 

8.  "  Who  cannot  want  the  thought  how  monstrous."  Scan.  (See 
Prosody,  477.)  Compare,  for  the  meaning  of  want, 
W.  T.  iii.  2.  55. 

19.  "I  think  .  .  .  they  should  find."  Modernize.  Explain  the 
difference  between  the  Elizabethan  and  the  modern  should. 
(See  326.) 

"  An't  please  heaven."     Explain  an't.     (See  IOI.) 
21.    "He/?//V  his  presence."     Comp.  Lear,  ii.  4.  143  : 
"  I  cannot  think  my  sister  in  the  least 

Would  fail  her  obligation. " 

How  is/«7  now  used  when  it  takes  an  object  after  it  ? 
27.    "  Received  <?/  the  most  pious  Edward."     (See  line  4.) 


NOTES  AND  QUESTIONS.  451 

LINE 

30.  "  Is  gone  to  pray  the  holy  king  upon  his  aid."  Unless  it  can 
be  shown  that  upon  is  sometimes  used  for  on,  this  line,  as 
it  stands,  is  an  Alexandrine. 

35.  "Free  from  our  feasts  and  banquets  bloody  knives."     Comp. 

Titnon  of  A.  v.  I.  : 

"  Rid  me  these  villains  from  your  companies." 
Also  perhaps  Tempest,  Epilogue  :   "  Prayer  which  frees  all 
faults. " 

36.  "Do  faithful  homage"     Trace  the  modern  and  ancient  mean- 

ing from  the  derivation. 

38.  "  Hath  so  exasperate  the  king. "  Why  is  the  d  omitted?  (See 
343-) 

40.  "  And  with  an  absolute  '  Sir,  not  I.'"  Compare  "an  absolute 
'shall'" — Coriol.  iii.  I.  Also,  "  an  absolute  and  excellent 
horse." — Hen.  V.  iii.  7;  "I  am  absolute  'twas  very 
Cloten." — Cymb.  iv.  2.  Trace  the  different  meanings  from 
the  derivation. 

42.    "  As  10/10  should  say. "     (See  257.) 


tt  r,  a 


INDEX  TO  THE  QUOTATIONS 

FROM  SHAKESPEARE'S  PLAYS. 


The  references  arc  to  the  numbered  paragraphs,  and  to  the  scenes  and  lines  of  the 
'*  Globe  "  edition. 

References  marked  thus  (fi  will  not  be  found  quoted  in  the  paragraph  referred 
to,  Intt  similar  references  will  be  found  explaining  the  difficulty  of  the  reference  in 
question. 

References  in  parentheses  thus  (6)  refer  to  the  explanatory  notes  at  the  end  of 
the  f>l<iy 


ALL'S  WELL  THAT  ENDS 

WELL. 

ACT 

I. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

ACT  IV. 

Sc.  Line 
i.    7  . 

Par. 
.  172 

i. 

ii. 

192  .  . 

73  .  • 

379 
27 

iv. 

7  • 

J  360 
'1374 

Sc. 
i. 

Line 

20  .   . 

Pnr. 
88 

i.   94  . 

•  477 

iii. 

26  .  . 

208 

iv. 

IS  - 

•  336 

i. 

21  .   . 

202 

ii.   29  . 

.  407 

iii. 

131  •  • 

177 

iv. 

27  • 

.  218 

ii. 

21  . 

247 

ii.  208  . 

•  445 

iii. 

142  .  . 

480 

iv. 

29  . 

.  484 

ii. 

30  •  • 

129 

iii.   71  . 

.  368 

iii. 

156.  - 

271 

iv. 

30  . 

419* 

iii. 

9  •  • 

489 

iii.  107  . 

•  372 

iii. 

168  .  . 

470 

V. 

43  • 

•  477 

iii. 

114  .  . 

400 

iii.  221  . 

•  279 

iii. 

179  .  . 

268 

V. 

48  . 

.  191 

iii. 

116  .  . 

400 

iii.  224  . 

.  81 

iii. 

185  .  . 

490 

V. 

58  - 

•   T 

iii. 

158  .  . 

434 

iii. 

223  .  . 

64 

V. 

98  . 

•  335 

iii. 

285  .  . 

301 

iii. 

289.  . 

489 

V. 

103  . 

•  175 

iii. 

298  .  . 

4OO 

ACT 

II. 

iii. 

3i3  •  • 

5°7 

V. 

104  . 

ig8a 

iii. 

299  •  • 

357 

i.    6 

.  418 

vi. 

24  • 

.  278 

1  76 

i.   60 

•  97 

ACT  III. 

vi. 

27  • 

.   12 

iv. 

30  .  . 

(Z 

i.   98 

.  468 

i. 

5  •  • 

485 

vi. 

109  . 

•  4°5 

V. 

46.  . 

212 

i.  no 

.  462 

ii. 

108  .  . 

434 

vi. 

"5  • 

.  2OO 

V. 

55  •  • 

87 

i.  in 

p.  14 

ii. 

in  .  . 

468 

vi. 

117  . 

•  243 

. 

i.  124 

•  434 

iv. 

i  .  . 

r  99 

vii. 

3°  • 

.  128 

ACT  V. 

i-  134 

'  349 

331 

vii. 

31  • 

.  492 

i.  144 

•  •  497 

iv. 

2  .   . 

312 

vii. 

32  • 

•  363 

i. 

24  .  . 

5'4 

i.  163 

•  •  473 

iv. 

6  .  . 

203    vii. 

70 

.  T27 

i. 

25  .  . 

5*4 

454 

INDEX. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par.    Sc.  Line 

Par.   Sc. 

Line 

Par.   Sc.  Line 

Par. 

iii. 

i  • 

.  172 

... 

f  4g 

iii. 

123  . 

.  466 

iii.  198  . 

•  243 

iii. 

4  • 

•  45 

111.   79  . 

'1220 

iii. 

134  • 

•  MS 

iii.  201  . 

•  425 

iii. 

27  . 

•  3i5 

iii.   85  . 

•  294 

iii. 

165  . 

•  507 

iii.  220  . 

•  434 

iii. 

47  • 

•  376 

iii.   86  . 

.  278 

iii. 

181  . 

•  J52 

iii.  237  . 

•  US 

iii. 

48  . 

•  492 

iii.  113  . 

.  326 

iii. 

184  . 

•  484 

ANTONY  AND  CLEOPATRA. 

ACT 

I. 

iv.   39  . 

•  433 

ii. 

79  • 

.  360 

vii.   83  . 

•  385 

i. 

19  . 

•  5i3 

iv.   42  . 

.  302 

ii. 

99  . 

•   * 

vii.  122  . 

-  364 

i. 

*7  • 

.  469 

iv-   43  • 

374 

•  ii. 

124  . 

•  423 

vii.  134  • 

97 

i. 

3i  • 

•  436 

iv.   44  . 

460 

ii. 

129  . 

•  364 

vii.  138  . 

509 

i. 

56. 

•  J93 

iv.   46  . 

33 

ii. 

137  • 

•|298 

ACT  III 

i. 

62  . 

•  177 

f'74 

<  crn 

(5° 

i.   15  - 

208 

i. 

142 

.  128 

IV.    J1  . 

i 

ii. 

144  . 

•  33i 

i-   33  • 

434 

ii. 

38  • 
"5  • 

12 

•  337 

iv.   73  . 

(484 

Isio 

ii. 
ii. 

160  . 
169. 

.  89 
•  J7 

i-   35  - 
ii.   17  . 

405 
509 

ii. 

127  . 

•  252 

v.    7  . 

482 

ii. 

192  . 

•  !79 

ii.   29  .  . 

492 

(62 

v.   17  . 

479 

ii. 

215  • 

•  430 

iii.   14  . 

210 

iii. 

8  . 

M347 
•  244 

V.    21. 

(3§ 

ii. 
iii. 

226  . 

22  . 

.  326 
•  24 

iv.   15  . 
iv.   31  .  . 

484 
285 

iii. 

ii  . 

•  434 

v-   33  •• 

490 

iii. 

26  . 

.  168 

vi.   28 

1  66 

iii. 
iii. 

23  • 

29  . 

.  191 
•  263 

v.   59  .. 

1298 
1451 

iii. 
iv. 

36. 
2  . 

.  166 
.  203 

vi.   30  .  . 
vi.   31  .  . 

404 
468 

iii. 

36  • 

12 

ACT  II. 

v. 

26  . 

.  484 

vi.   52  .  . 

497 

111. 

41  . 

•  301 

v. 

27  . 

•  477 

vi.   76  .  . 

II 

iii. 
iii. 

42  . 
48  . 

•  370 
.  412 

i.   8  .  . 
i-   15  •  • 

i78 
498 

V. 
V. 

38  • 

44  • 

.  484 
•  25 

vi.   97  .  . 
vii.   28  .  . 

Sio 
477 

iii. 
iii. 

iii. 

55  • 
68  . 
73  • 

.  290 

.  508 

•  363   1 

i.   20  .. 
i.   24  .  . 
i.   31  •  • 

469 
492 
405 

v. 
v. 

78  . 
94  • 
106  . 

•  364 
•  133 
•  13 

vii.   40  .  . 
vii.   50  .  . 

460 
478 

iii. 

79  • 

•  472 

i.   38  .. 

434 

vi. 

38  . 

.  460 

x.   53  .. 

,220 

iii. 

95  • 

•  384 

i.   48  .. 

492 

f:_ 

xi.    3  .  . 

460 

iii. 

97  • 

•  293 

i.   51  •  • 

204 

VI. 

OO  . 

'{405 

xi.   10  .  . 

5<>7 

iii. 

100  . 

.  480 

'•   53  •  • 

in 

vi. 

78  . 

.  236 

xi.   48  .  . 

124 

iv. 

4  • 

.  4'.o 

i.   61  .  . 

507 

vi. 

86  . 

•  382 

xi.   54  •  • 

460 

iv. 

6  . 

.  469 

ii.   25  .  . 

364 

vii. 

18  . 

.  290 

xi.   58  .  . 

326 

iv. 

20  . 

.  I98 

ii.   30  .  . 

404 

vii. 

29  • 

.  221 

xi.   68  .  . 

453 

INDEX. 


455 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

xii. 

12  . 

•  377 

i. 

27  . 

•  387 

ix.   9  .  . 

469 

i. 

47  • 

xii. 

36  • 

•  3*5 

i. 

28  . 

•  507 

-\i.    I  .  . 

124 

xiii. 

4  • 

•  507 

i. 

34  • 

•  356 

xii.    i  . 

76 

i. 

Si  • 

xiii. 

6  . 

.478 

ii. 

7  • 

.  241 

xii.   48  .  . 

498 

i. 

58  • 

xiii. 

10  . 

•  294 

ii. 

27  • 

.  64 

xiv.   19  .  . 

435 

68  . 

xiii. 

27  • 

•  381 

iv. 

3  • 

.  482 

xiv.   22  .  . 

243 

. 

69  . 

Q_ 

xiii. 

47  • 

•485 

iv. 

ii  . 

.  480 

xiv.   72  .  . 

494 

. 

05   . 

xiii. 
xiii. 

77  • 

•  505 
•  372 

vi. 
vi. 

3  • 

12  . 

•  315 
•  503 

xiv.  120  .  . 

1505 

i. 
i. 

103   . 

106  . 

xiii. 

96  . 

•  499 

vi. 

30  . 

f  18 

xiv.  133  . 
xv.   59  • 

23° 
241 

i. 

146  . 
58  . 

xiii. 

98. 

U97 

vi. 

39  • 

•  423 

ii. 

216  . 

xiii. 

99  . 

.  132 

vii. 

5  • 

•  344 

ACT  V. 

ii. 

225  . 

xiii. 

138  . 

.  290 

vii. 

16  . 

.  212 

ii. 

236  . 

xiii. 

196  . 

•  472 

viii. 

i  . 

-  364 

i.   2  . 

477 

ii. 

240  . 

ACT  IV. 

viii. 

7  • 

•  484 

i.    3  . 

3*5 

ii. 

291  . 

viii. 

31  . 

•  499 

i.   21  . 

20 

i. 

3  • 

.  420 

viii. 

22  . 

.  166 

i.   27  . 

126 

ii. 

306  . 

i. 

14  . 

.  484 

viii. 

31- 

419/1 

i.   31  • 

193 

ii. 

339  • 

AS 

YOU  LIKE  IT. 

ACT 

I.         ii. 

121  . 

•t359    Hi.  (66\ 

.  281 

ii. 

13  • 

i. 

2  . 

•  85 

ii. 

'34 

i  f        lw  ) 
.7269 

iii. 

7  • 

i. 

i. 

3  • 

20  . 

•  399 
.  198 

ii. 

(I491 
\i5ol 

in.   75  . 
iii.   76  . 

.  70 
.  81 

iii. 

8  . 

i. 

46. 

.  208 

ii. 

165  . 

•  +  295 

iii.  117  . 

.  287 

iii. 

W 

i. 

/79\ 

\8o/ 

•  232 

ii. 
ii. 

196. 
220  . 

.+223 
•  (0 

iii.  118  . 
iii.  122  . 

.  202 

•  455 

iii. 

27  • 
(20) 

'• 

"5  • 

•+356 

ii. 

240  . 

^322 

iii.  124  . 

.t*26 

iii. 

\  \ 

W 

i. 

121  . 

•  87 

ii. 

254  • 

.  90  '     ACT  II 

iii. 

42  . 

129  . 

.  81 

ii. 

.260' 

\27OJ 

•t494 
i.    6  . 

.  490 
•  "3 

iii. 
iii. 

50  . 

58  . 

i. 

139  • 

.  196 

ii. 

272  . 

.  136 

i.    8  . 

.t272 

iii. 

69  . 

i. 

154  • 

.+230 

ii. 

278  . 

•  (2) 

i-   33  • 

.  269 

iv. 

10  . 

i. 

172  . 

.t2o6     ii. 

279  . 

.  216 

i.   49  • 

.tsoi 

iv. 

35  • 

ii. 

6  . 

.  291     iii. 

35  • 

•  (3) 

i.   52  • 

•  495 

1s6! 

ii. 

30 

.1196    iii. 

44  • 

•  465 

i.  /68| 

.tsoo 

iv. 

ii. 

fQ4l 
t95/ 

•  +  347 

iii 

&} 

.+287 

ii.    5  • 

.  423    iv. 

40  . 

456                  INDEX. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

iv.   44  .  .178 

vii.  172  .  .  356 

iii.   51  .  .  64 

iii.   53  .  .490 

iv.  {*9|   .  93 

vii.  193  .  .  490 

iv.  Is  XV  .  260 

iii.   76  .  .{401 

vii.  196  .  .  467 

\52j  ' 

H56 

iv.   69  ..  482 

fi98\ 

v.    3  .  .  494 

iii.   88  .  .  478 

iv.   75  .  .  403 

V11'  ii99/'  -t233 

v.    5  .  .  291 

iii.  no  .  ^264 

(254 
iv.   86  .  .<3i5 

ACT  III. 

r.    6  .  .  120 

iii.  117  .  .  326 

v.    5  •  -+364 
v.   26  .  .1244 

i.     2  .   .  202 

i.    4  .  .  380 
i.   18  .  .  (5) 

V'  {13}'  •& 

v.   16  .  .ti03 

iii.  119  .  .  115 
iii.  123  .  .f494 
iii.  124  .  .  460 

v.   33  •  -ti37 
v.   34  ..  200 

v.   42  .  .  494 
v.   48  ..  444 

iii.  132  .  .  264 
iii.  150  .  .fi6i 

v.   36  ..  t3 

ii.  f22}   t40i 

v.   49  ..  458 

iii.  162  .  .+113 

vi.   ii  .  .  t59 

ii.   33  •  •  (6) 

v.   53  ..  247 
v.   60  .  ^405 

iii.  162  .  .fsi3 

vii.   i  .  .  299 

ii.   50  .  .  125 

v.   61  .  .f2oi 

ACT  V. 

vii.   3  •  •  38 

ii.   54  •  •  t6g 

v.   62  ..  356 

ii.    3  .  .t378 

vii.    4  .  .178 

ii.   62  .  .  tn 

v.   74  .  .  499 

ii.    7  .  .{225 

vii.   31  ..   2 
vii.   48  .  .  196 

ii.  100  .  .  ts 
ii.  127  .  .  fig 

v.   94  .  4287 
v.  118  .  .  501 

ii.   88  .  .  483 
ii.  91-94.  .tsoo 

vii.   52  .  .  83 

vii.   68  .  .  t89 
vii.   73  .  .  (4) 
vii.   75  .  .1-287 

ii.  144  .  .  217 
ii.  147  .  .  492 

«•  *.-  •{$ 

v.  122  .  .  494 

ACT  IV. 
i.    7  .  .  (9) 

ii.  1  10  .  .  356 
ii.  115  .  .1274 
iii.   15  .  .  81 

vii.   83  .  4497 

ii.  163  .  .  443 

(3i) 

iv.    5  .  .  490 

vii.   88   jf343 

ii.  182  .  .  328 

l.   J4o[.  .  CO 
W 

iv.  {22}.  •  416 

vii.   96  .  .  467 
vii.   99  .  .t474 
vii.  101  .  .  (i) 

ii.  187  .  .  284 
ii.  188  .  .  271 
ii.  196  .  4193 

i.   52  .  4170 
i.   60  .  4372 
i.  100  .  ^243 

iv.   56  .  .  174 

iv.    63  .   ..-(221 

iv.   72  .  .fii3 

ii.  236  .  4194 

iii    6     sio 

iv.  108  .  .  192 

vii.  104  .  .  100 
vii.  119  .  .  270 

ii.  261  .  4329 
ii.  268-74  •  5" 

iii.   10  .  .ti78 

iv.  125  .  .+469 
iv.  140  .  .tiSg 

vii.  132  ..   4 
vii.  139  .  .  407 
vii.  143  .  .t47i 

ii.  269  .  20,  n. 
ii.  320-2  .  .  (7) 
ii.  330  .  .t274 

iii.   12  .  .  115 
iii.   16  .  .  382 
Hi.   21  .  .f4S7 
iii.   25  .  .  501 

iv.  151  .  .f474 
iv.  167  .  .  399 
iv.  170  .  .  403 

vii>  lljs}'  '  83 

ii.  362  .  .  (8) 

iii.   34  .  .  430 

iv.  171  .  .  354 

vii.  159  .  .  90 

ii.  411  .  .  224 

iii.   36  .  .t468 

iv.  178  .  .  12 

vii  Il68l 

iii.    3  •  •  92 

(so) 

iv.  201  .  4513 

'  tx69/-  •  513 

iii.   10  .  .  294 

in-  {^j.  .  412 

iv.  218  .  .  367 

^\  «w°'  "*?*•",   ,  (2)  Compare  iv.  i.  20.     (3)  Hamlet,  i.  2.  182. 

(4)   Wearers  for  "weary."    (5)  Rich.  III.  \.  2.  217.    (6)  See  i.  2.  52. 
(7)  Rich.  II.  v.  5.  55.       (8)  Ib.  v.  i.  23.      (9)  Macbeth  iv  3  170 

INDEX. 


457 


COMEDY  OF  ERRORS. 


ACT  I. 

ACT  III. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

i. 

39  • 

•  3»9 

i.   79  . 

.  484 

i.   16  . 

•  512 

i. 

7  • 

J282 

>• 

60  . 

.  466 

i.  138  • 

•  4*7 

i-   33  • 
»•   39  • 

.  2!6 

.  480 

i. 

I24}- 
(25* 

.  502 

i. 

65  - 

95  . 

-  456 
.  480 

i-  153- 
i.  170  . 

.  178 
.  24 

i.   42  . 

•  37 

i. 

40  . 

.  502 

ii. 

7  • 

.  406 

i.  181  . 

•  29 

i.   46  - 

•  344 

'• 

47  • 

.  502 

ii. 

(42|. 

.  460 

i.  196  . 

.  469 

i.   52  - 

.  280 

i. 

50  . 

.  502 

1.43' 

i.  198  . 

.  216 

i-   53  • 

.  271 

i. 

5i  - 

.  502 

iv. 

3  • 

.  460 

1.   222  . 

.  467 

i.   64  . 

•  434 

i. 

52  • 

.  502 

iv. 

66  . 

.  226 

i.  =30. 

.  270 

i.   85  . 

•  251 

i- 

54  • 

•  502 

iv. 

152  . 

•  329 

i.  268  . 

.  196 

i.   86  . 

.  202 

i. 

72  - 

.  502 

i.  28?  . 

•  349 

i.  105  . 

•  344 

i- 

74  • 

'(500 

ACT  V 

i.  283  . 

•  244 

i.  151  • 

•  453 

i. 

90  . 

•  57 

i.  308  . 

-  344 

ii.    2  . 

•  490 

ii. 

3°  - 

•  '75 

i. 

10  . 

.   20 

»•  3i3  • 

-  343 

»•   37  • 

.  260 

ii. 

153  • 

.  263 

i. 

ii  . 

•  354 

»•  357  • 

•  47i 

ACT  II 

ii. 

186  . 

.  422 

i. 

25  • 

•  349 

i.  358  . 

•  477 

i-   33  • 

.   12 

i. 

46  . 

•  49° 

i.  360. 

•  477 

"•  43-45- 

•  74 

ACT  IV. 

i. 

69  . 

(  22 

•J335 

»•  379  • 

.  299 

ii.  180  . 

.  158 

'• 

12  . 

.361 

i.  388  . 

•  343 

CORIOLANUS. 

ACT  I 

i. 

108  . 

•  419 

i. 

200  . 

.  501 

i.  251  . 

tigSa 

/3O2 

i. 

"5  - 

•t497 

i. 

201  . 

.  467 

i-  255  . 

•  492 

i.   18  . 
••   37  • 

.t252 

i. 
i. 

118  . 
123  . 

.  +  287 

i. 
i. 

207  . 
209  . 

•  470 
•  24 

i.  256  . 

(t482 
H484 

i  °r 

i.   40  . 
i.   74  . 

.  420 
.  467 

i. 

124  . 
126  . 

.t264 

i. 

«,.{' 

P-I3 

i.  263  - 

I  5" 

-  356 

»•   75  • 

.  486 

i. 

144  . 

.  287 

i. 

2I7  . 

.tio7 

i.  272  .-j 

tp-«3 

i.   82  . 

•  95 

i. 

157  . 

.*202 

i. 

218  . 

.  472 

* 

(31 

i.   98 

ftioi 

V  d) 

i. 

158  . 
179  . 

•  477 
.  244 

i. 
i. 

220  . 
223  . 

.  484 
.  386 

i.  276  • 
i.  283  . 

tp.  13 

I   (4) 

i.  101  . 
i.  102  . 

.  442 

L 

i93  • 
195  • 

.ti7i. 

-t32I 

'• 

230  . 
231  . 

-  458 
t444 

ii.    2  . 

ft  159 
1*295 

i.  105  . 

(  134 

U494 

i. 

197  . 

•  tsoi 

i- 

236  . 

.  206 

ii.    4  . 

.   12 

•  , 

i. 

198  . 

•  4/1 

i. 

247  . 

.  386 

ii.   14  . 

.  486 

i.  107  . 

It494 

i. 

199  . 

.  290 

i. 

248  . 

.  468 

ii.   22  . 

•t494 

45* 


INDEX. 


Par.  .  Sc. 

Line 

Par.  I  Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

.  29  !   vi. 

55  • 

•+4^3 

i. 

188  . 

iii.  no  . 

.+401 

•+5J3 

60 

/  305 

i. 

2C2  . 

.  182 

iii.  128  . 

•  456 

•  t5I2 

t+457 

i. 

216  . 

•  499 

iii.  131  . 

^462 

.+322 

vi. 

70  . 

.faoo 

j. 

222  . 

.t22I 

iii.  147  . 

•  404 

.  296 

vi. 

72  . 

•  t285 

i. 

235  • 

.  286 

iii.  157  . 

•(  3° 

•  4i 

vi. 

81  . 

•  499 

j. 

244  . 

•+4I4 

'U°5 

•  503 

vii. 

2  . 

•  499 

i. 

257  • 

•  350 

iii.  163  . 

•  343 

.  420 

vii. 

6  . 

•  tsi2 

i. 

262  . 

.  I87 

iii.  167  . 

•+494 

•+494 

viii. 

7  • 

.tsoo 

i. 

269. 

.+497 

iii.  183  . 

•  470 

.469 

viii. 

8  . 

•  430 

i. 

284  . 

.t469 

iii.  184  . 

.  281 

.  400 

ix. 

6  . 

•  374 

ii. 

16  . 

•t399 

iii.  190  . 

.+198 

'{i46 

ix. 
ix. 

7  • 
17  • 

•  492 
•  477 

ii. 

I'9!- 

\20) 

{408 

iii.  192  . 
iii.  214  . 

•+492 
•  27 

.+182 

ix. 

36  • 

.  219 

ii. 

29  . 

•  384 

iii.  215  . 

•  175 

•+329 

ix. 

43  • 

•t497 

ii. 

30  • 

•  (8) 

iii.  |214}. 

•  383 

•+231 

ix. 

45  • 

.  484 

ii. 

35  • 

•  442 

iii.  216  . 

ix. 

So  . 

•tS11 

ii. 

41  . 

•  174 

43 

•  H4 

ix. 

52  • 

.  458 

ii. 

ft2l8 

iii.  231  . 

•  471 

.  480 
•t497 
•  +500 
.  460 

ix. 
ix. 
ix. 

ix. 

55  • 
57  • 
58  • 
78  . 

.  (5) 

.  458 

•+497 
•+3I5 

ii. 
ii. 

ii. 

44  . 
80  . 
85  - 
93  • 

\  (9) 

•  463 
.  182 

(43 
I  77 

m-  IS/' 
iii.  238  . 
iii.  242  . 
iii.  244  . 

.  456 
.  141 

•t349 
•  23 

V  6 

ix. 

83  • 

•  484 

ii. 

98  . 

.  20 

iii.  257  . 

.  290 

•  474 
•  343 

X. 
X. 

19  . 

•  134 
.  468 

ii. 
ii. 

IOO  . 

107  . 

•  312 

•  45 

iii.  259  . 
iii.  262  . 

•  tsoo 
•  63 

•'457 
.  486 

X. 
X. 

30  • 
33  • 

ACT  II 

•+3I5 

ii. 

ii. 

& 

117  . 
128  . 

.(10) 
.  480 

iii.  263  . 
iii.  266  . 
iii.  268  . 

.  162 
•tiS9 

•  232 

I 

8  . 

•  274 

ii. 

129  . 

•  419 

ACT  III. 

•  435 

,0 

ii. 

136  • 

•  (*  0 

i.   10  . 

•fl  SI 

lo  . 

•  4°7 

•f  3S 
1+513 

i. 

25  • 

(6)  i   '"' 

i  . 

•  57 

i.   n  . 

•+295 

.1283 

J 

SI  ( 

(7) 

in. 

12  . 

.  270 

i.   23  . 

.t223 

•  tio7 

Si  •{ 

P-  13 

iii. 

16  . 

•  244 

i-   33  • 

•  +  IS9 

(317 

'U62 

•+494 

i. 

91  . 

105  . 

u 

•+379 

iii. 
iii. 

0 

•  MS 
•(12) 

i-   35  • 
i.   70  . 

•  471 
•+497 

.  64 

'• 

143  . 

•  (i) 

iii. 

89  . 

•  (0 

*'  194/' 

'  3,16 

i. 

152  . 

•  343 

iii. 

107  . 

•  56 

i.   94  . 

•  47° 

•  +  5I3 

i. 

180  . 

•  430 

iii. 

109  . 

.  ti 

i.   96  . 

•  +  I59 

INDEX. 


Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

ACT  IV. 

Sc 

Line 

Par. 

i.  101  . 

•  492 

ii. 

44  • 

.   12 

vi. 

13  . 

•  505 

i.  103  . 

.t376 

ii. 

50  • 

.t287 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

vi. 

•  497 

i.  112  . 

.498 

ii. 

.  290 

i. 

3  • 

•  295 

vi. 

33  • 

.  506 

i.   122  . 

.  261 

ii. 

52  • 

.  204 

i. 

{sf 

•  333 

vi. 

34  • 

.{219 

»•  »37  • 

.  508 

ii. 

M- 

' 

i. 

12  . 

•  475 

vi. 

35  • 

.  318 

i.  144  . 

f  tl2 

154/ 

i. 

14  • 

•t494 

vi. 

39  • 

.t244 

i.  146  . 
i.  161  . 

•t243 

ii. 
ii. 

54  • 
55  • 

•  485 
•  279 

i. 

21  . 
27  . 

•  3r9 
•t495 

vi. 
vi. 

40  . 

45  • 

/i59 
.  440 

ii. 

71  • 

•  54 

i- 

47  • 

•  M3 

vi. 

53  • 

•  348 

*'  \i62l- 

.1400 

ii. 

75  - 

•  453 

i. 

53  • 

•  78 

vi. 

i.  170  . 

.  411 

ii. 

76. 

•  494 

i. 

55  • 

•  87 

vi. 

68  . 

•t473 

i.  195  . 
i.  202  . 

.  476 

ii. 

81  . 
83  • 

•  47° 
.  216 

ii. 
ii. 

2  . 

5  • 

.  410 

vi. 

ft}' 

•  5M 

i.  206  . 
i.  208  . 
i.  215  . 

•OS) 
.+136 

•  476 

ii. 
ii. 

ii. 

92  . 
105  . 
116  . 
119  . 

•ti59 
.  278 
.1  365 
.  264 

ii. 
ii. 

ii. 

13  • 
31  • 
36  . 
48  . 

.t287 

•t5'3 
.  188 

vi. 
vi. 
vi. 
vi. 

73  • 
79  • 
85  • 
103  . 

•   9 

•+5I3 
•  492 

.t25, 

l<  {"er 

.  81 

ii. 

125  . 

.  216 

((14) 

vi. 

104  . 

.  510 

i.   221  . 

•t494 

ii. 

138  . 

•t5I2 

iii. 

9  • 

••{295 

vi. 

{ils}' 

•  36l 

i.  231  . 
i.  251  . 

.  500 
.t466 

iii. 

142  . 

2  . 

•tsxj 

.1467 

iii. 
iii. 

13  • 
48  • 

•t335 
•(13) 

vi. 

vi. 

118  . 

.  l64 

i.  259  . 

•  399 

in. 

4  • 

.  382 

v. 

14  . 

•OS) 

vi. 

'39  • 

.t5i3 

'•  & 

•  23 

iii. 

6  . 

J+494 
ItSiJ 

V. 
V. 

58  . 
63  . 

.  510 
•t349 

vi. 

148  . 

{f215 

i.  280  . 

.  484 

iii. 

8  . 

•t494 

V. 

98  . 

.  287 

vii. 

4  • 

.   90 

i.  298  . 

tuSrt 

in. 

19  . 

.  202 

V. 

99  • 

.1285 

vii. 

8  . 

.   II 

i.  301  . 

•  t242 

iii. 

49  • 

•  512 

V. 

no  . 

•  5°5 

vii. 

14  . 

•  479 

i.  311  . 

(478 

iii. 

62  . 

.  63 

V. 

113  • 

vii. 

40  . 

jt356 

i.  319  . 
>•  327  • 

•  343 
.  492 

iii. 
iii. 
iii. 

67  • 
87  . 

Q-J 

.  482 

•  475 

V. 
V. 

133  • 
149  . 

.  187 
.  484 

vii. 
vii. 

Si  • 

•  136 
•  49° 

i.  329  . 
i-  334  . 

.t46S 
.  480 

iii. 
iii. 

yj  • 

96  . 

97  • 

•tii3 
•  54 

V. 
V. 
V. 

156. 

157  • 
174  . 

•t344 
.  460 
.  182 

vii. 

57  . 
ACT  V 

•t473 

ii.    6  . 

i  sll 

iii. 

104  . 

•  430 

JP*  *3 

i. 

3  • 

.t468 

iii. 

122  . 

197  . 

ii.   12  . 
ii.   26  . 

.  129 
.  468 

iii. 

124  . 

•  442 

V. 

203  . 

.  181 

i. 

ill- 

.  290 

ii.   39  . 

(tsoo 
<  or 

iii. 

I27  . 

•457" 

V. 
V. 

205  . 
214  . 

.  too 
•t43<> 

i. 
i. 

34  • 
39  • 

•  434 
.+506 

(t494 

iii. 

»33  • 

t  510 

vi. 

ii  . 

.  498 

'• 

46  . 

.t28o 

460 


INDEX. 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

i. 

54  • 
62  . 

•  471 
•(17) 

in. 

21  . 

.ti6i 

iii. 

{144}' 

.t278 

vi. 

/22\ 

•+249 

ii. 

5  • 

•+494 

iii. 

\35r 

•  490 

iii. 

(i49\ 

Usi/ 

•  457 

vi. 

23 

•+494 

ii. 

8  . 

•  13 

iii. 

I54}' 

•+442 

iii. 

154  • 

•+497 

vi. 

35 

.  448 

ii. 

18  . 

•  458 

(.72 

iii. 

170  . 

.  460 

vi. 

40 

.  290 

ii. 

22  . 

•  +93 

iii. 

67  . 

.  469 

iii. 

186  . 

.419* 

vi. 

4i 

•+495 

ii. 

41  . 

.  183 

iii. 

82  . 

+P-I3 

iii. 

189  . 

.  ti 

vi. 

43 

•  1285 

ii. 

65  • 

•(15) 

iii. 

95  • 

•  423 

iii. 

192  . 

•  483 

vi. 

44 

.  227 

ii. 

77  • 

.1212 

iii. 

96. 

•+490 

iv. 

39  • 

•  492 

vi. 

61 

•+5I3 

11. 

89  . 

•  294 

iii. 

too  . 

•+349 

iv. 

55  • 

•  469 

vi. 

69 

.  462 

ii. 

90  . 

.  16 

iii. 

105  . 

•  479 

iv. 

64  . 

•  H3 

vi. 

7i 

•+479 

ii. 

95  • 

•+151 

iii. 

108  . 

•+494 

vi. 

4  • 

.  238 

vi. 

77 

.  420 

iii. 

4  • 

•  479 

iii. 

"5  • 

•  478 

vi. 

5  • 

.  208 

vi. 

IOI 

.  480 

iii. 

Is}' 

•+279 

iii. 

121  . 

•  455 

vi. 

ii  . 

•  t440 

vi. 

128 

tp.  13 

ii  . 

.  290 

iii. 

"5  • 

.  482 

vi. 

i5  • 

.  166 

vi. 

138 

•+457 

(i) 

Folio, 

'and." 

(2)  M.forM.  iv.  6. 

13. 

(3)  7-  c. 

iii.  2. 

16. 

(4) 

Othello,  i.  2.  22. 

CsM 

and  C.  i.  4.  40. 

(6)  See  above, 

i.  i.  2 

72. 

(7)  See  .4. 

Y.  L.  ii.  2.  8. 

(8) 

Hamlet,  v.  2. 

95. 

(9)  M.  of  V.  i 

v.  1.406. 

(10)  Hamlet,  i.  1.  162.               (n) 

Conversely,  i  Hen.  VI.  v.  4 

7. 

(12) 

M.  of 

V.\.\.  98.               (13)  Tempest,  i.  a.  200.  Ref. 

(14) 

Folio, 

"appeared." 

(15) 

y.c. 

iv.  3.  138. 

(16) 

y.c. 

iii.  3.  22. 

(17) 

3He, 

t.  VI.  iii.  2.  46 

CYMBELINE. 

ACT  I 

I   iv. 

I7  . 

.  412 

v. 

41  . 

•  93 

vi. 

164 

.  .  18 

iv. 

36. 

•  382 

v. 

44  • 

•  356 

vi. 

209 

.  .   i 

i. 

24  . 

.  81 

iv. 

39  • 

•  405 

vi. 

6 

•  334 

ACT 

II. 

i. 

48  . 

•  465 

iv. 

53  • 

•  427 

vi. 

8 

•  337 

iii. 

24 

•  •  247 

i. 

65  • 

•  279 

iv. 

IOI  . 

•  434 

vi. 

36 

•  375 

iii. 

29 

.  .   i 

i. 

72  . 

•  465 

iv. 

112  . 

.  90 

vi. 

48 

•  499 

iii. 

59 

•  •  297 

i- 

96. 

•  473 

iv. 

118  . 

.  189 

vi. 

50 

.  224 

iii. 

68 

•  •  13 

i. 

105  . 

•  244 

iv. 

125  - 

•  368 

vi. 

59 

(  53 

iii. 

80 

.  .  76 

i. 

124  . 

•  382 

v. 

9  • 

•  467 

"\  85 

iii. 

IOI 

.  .419* 

i- 

132  . 

.  508 

v. 

10  . 

.  484 

vi. 

66 

.  .  290 

iii. 

in 

.  .  148 

i. 

168  . 

•  465 

v. 

J7  • 

•  370 

vi. 

84 

•  244 

iii. 

I5I 

•  •  508 

iii. 

7  • 

•  453 

v. 

25  • 

•  93 

vi. 

116 

.  .   8 

(119 

iii. 

29  . 

.  224 

v. 

28  . 

•  478 

vi. 

117 

•  247 

in. 

T53 

•1299 

iii. 

16  . 

.  158 

v. 

32  • 

.  212    vi.(Fol.)i47.  340    iv. 

57 

•  •  336 

INDEX. 


461 


Sc 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

iv. 

88  . 

497 

v.  148  .  . 

290 

ii. 

207  . 

.  86 

iv. 

147  . 

.  290 

iv. 

191  . 

434 

v.  170  . 

336 

ii. 

223  . 

.  246 

iv. 

149  . 

.  404 

ACT  III 

. 

vi.   17  .  . 

M3 

ii. 

229. 

•  435 

iv. 

179  . 

.{  95 

i. 

38  . 

357 

vi.   19  .  . 

35i 

ii. 

252  . 

.   12 

v. 

2  , 

3  7 

n. 

g 

•  429 

vi.   25  .  . 

35i 

ii. 

254  • 

•  74 

•* 

ii. 

73  • 

•  356 

vi.   42  .  . 
vi.   48  .  . 

301 
360 

ii. 

283  . 

•  335 
•   7 

V. 
V. 

28  . 
4i  . 

•  215 

.  I2O 

ii. 

79  • 

'\352 

vi.   63  .  . 

295 

ii. 

347  • 

•  34i 

V. 

51  • 

•  326 

iii. 

27  . 

•  333 

vi.   70  .  . 

126 

ii. 

371  • 

•  335 

V. 

60  . 

.  466 

iii. 

99  • 

•  336 

vi.   92  .  . 

M7 

ii. 

373  • 

.  484 

V. 

85  • 

.   84 

iii.  102  .  .  198 
iii.  (Fol.)  103.  340 
iv.   71  .  .  144 
iv.   85  .  .  226 

ACT  IV 
i.   16  . 
ii.    2  . 
ii.   20  . 

256 
336 
297 

iii. 
iii. 
iii. 
iii. 

9  • 
15  • 
19  . 

21  . 

.{453 

U72 

•  47i 
•  5" 
.  400 

V. 
V. 
V. 

v. 

139  • 
169  . 

186  . 
230  . 

•  356 
.   28 
•  238 
.  238 

iv. 

135  • 
143  . 

•  509 
•  335 

ii.   26  . 

"•   35  • 

476 
333 

iii. 
iv. 

233  • 

6  . 

•  215 
•  433 

v. 

v. 

233  - 
252  . 
255  • 

•  335 
•  4i9 
.  290 

iv. 

144  ' 

.{JP 

ii.   47  • 

(2Q5 
.-(296 
(41  r 

iv. 

iv. 

i5  • 
23  • 

.  161 

•  4°3 

V. 
V. 

297  . 
3"  • 

.  230 
.  182 

iv. 

153  • 

.  465 

ii.   54  • 

453 

iv. 

35  • 

.  86 

V. 

338. 

.  280 

iv. 

160  . 

.  228 

ii.   66  . 

•  347 

iv. 

48  . 

•  174 

V. 

343  • 

•  4*3 

iv. 

187  . 

•  507 

ii-   75  • 

•  274 

ACT 

V. 

V. 

349  • 

•  473 

v. 

21  . 

•  343 

ii.   97  . 

.  16 

i. 

8  . 

•  327 

V. 

406. 

•  344 

V. 

32  • 

.  220 

ii.  129  . 

151 

iii. 

45  • 

.  466 

V. 

407  . 

.  486 

V. 

58  • 

.  368 

ii.  146  . 

•  47 

iv. 

60  . 

.   22 

V. 

43i  • 

.  158 

V. 

v. 

71  • 
83  • 

.  285 

•  45 

ii.  190  . 

f  89 
•J347 
<473 

iv. 

iv. 

109  . 

120 

•  T54 
•  295 

v. 
v. 

464  . 
469- 

•  249 
•  434 

HAMLET. 

ACT  I 

i.   45  • 

.1329 

i. 

77 

.  312 

i. 

108  . 

.  299 

i 

i  • 

•  512 

i.   53  • 

.t458 

i. 

81 

.  +  130 

i. 

114  . 

.   8 

i 

6  . 

.  191 

i-   55  • 

.  181 

i. 

84 

.  .  92 

i. 

115  . 

.t468 

i 

.   26  . 

•  30 

i.   56  . 

•  3" 

f469 

i. 

116  . 

•  304 

i 

3*-33 

•  382 

i-   57  • 

•   3 

11 

86 

'  'M0° 

i. 

117  . 

•  "3 

i 

33  • 
•   35  • 

.  361 
.  512 

1  {Si' 

•  5^3 

i- 

93 

Jt453 
\  494 

i. 

119  . 

122  . 

.  204 

1 

40  . 

•t5i3 

i.   70  . 

'{364 

i. 

98 

•  •  433 

f'29l 

1 

•  {43}' 

.  469 

i.   72  . 

.  290 

'• 

{iS} 

.tit? 

*' 

ii35) 

•  5" 

INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par 

i.  136  .  .  429 

ii.  140  .  .  501 

iii.   63  .  .t242 

iv.   60  ..  176 

i.  143  .  .  470 
i.  154  .  p.  13 

ii.  141  .  .  312 
ii.  142  .  .  34 

iii.   66  .  .  470 
iii.   70  .  .  276 

iv.   6!  .  .{49* 

i.  158  .  .  142 

ii.  151  .  .  194 

iii.   85  .  .tsoi 

iv.   65  .  .  f89 

i.  161  .  .  463 

ii.  159  .  .t364 

iii.   89  .  .  457 

iv.   90  .  .(29° 
(.442 

i.  168  .  .  364 

ii.  160  .  .  497 

iii.   95  .  .  t89 

iv.  120  .  .  513 

ii.   ii  .  .  (i) 

ii.  171  .  .+277 

iii.  101  .  \  '* 

iv.  139  .  .  i49 

ii.   14  .  .tiSg 

ii.  172  .  .  443 

I  453 

iv.  163  .  .  492 

ii.   17  .  .  244 

ii.  176  .  .  494 

iii.  112  .  .  513 

iv.  173  .  .  47o 

ii.   20  .  .  341 

ii.  179  .  .  192 

iii.  117  .  .  478 

iv.  175  .  .  178 

ii.   21  .  /p.i6 
ii.   22  .  .t?42 

ii.  180  .  .  469 
ii.  183  .  .ti3i 

iii.  119  .  .  164 
iii.  126  .  .   5 

iv.  178  .  .  350 
iv.  180  .  .  17 

ii.   23  .  .p.i6 

ii.  184  .  .  506 

iii.  129  .  .  245 

... 

ii.   27  .  .t343 

ii.  185  .  .  480 

iii.  130  .  .  (5) 

iv.  186  .  |t297 

ii.   35  •  •  148 

ii.  193  .  .  307 

iii.  131  .  .  57 

ii.   37  .  .  186 

ii.  198  .  .  450 

iii.  133  ..   2 

ACT  II. 

ii.   38  .  .  412 

ii.  207  ..   3 

iv.    3  .  .  297 

i.   ii  ..  ii 

ii.   41-9  .  235 

ii.  216  .  .  304 

iv.   §.  .5,3 

i.   36  ..  482 

ii.   68  .  .  294 

ii.  217  .  .tio7 

iv.    6  .  .   5 

i.   42  ..  208 

..  „.{*•» 

ii.   81  .  .  460 

ii.  218  .  .  ts8 
ii.  219  .  .1339 
ii.  223  .  .1343 

iv.   18  .  .ti7o 
iv.   21  .  .  90 
iv.   30  ..   3 

L   S8'  "U 
i.   64  ..  168 

ii.   87  .  .  490 

i.   82  ..  275 

ii.   90  ..  246 

ii.  {^}.  .t5i3 

iv-   35  •  .tsiS 

i.   84  ..  478 

ii.   92  .  .(<3) 
(492 

ii.  232  .  .  468 

iv.   47  .  .  491 
iv.   51  .  .1307 

i.   91  ..  507 

ii.   95  .  ,i88a 

iii.    2  .  .109 

iv.   52  .  .  492 

i-  {^}-  •  178 

ii.   99  .  .419** 

iii.    8  .  .484 

iv.   54  .  .  216 

i.   95  ••  109 

"'  {101}-  '  2Sa 

iii.   17  .  .t376 

iv-   57  •  •  75 

i.  112  .  .  472 

ii.  {IOIj.  i&Ba 

iii.   21  .  .I48'* 

iv.   70    /20° 

i.  114  •  .  ti6 

73   1423 

ii.  105  .  .  206 

iii.   24  .  .  497 

iv.    6  .  .  501 

'•  {119}'  '  29° 

ii.  in  .  .  82 

iii.   30  .  .  199 

iv.   ii  .  .  149 

ii.    2  .  .  50 

ii.  112  .  .  149 

iii.   43  •  •  82 

iv-   13  •  -t343 

ii.    5  .  .  479 

ii.  119  .  .{456 

iii.   45  .  .{318 

iv.   18  .  .  350 

ii.    7  .  .  325 

(460 

iii.  47-51  .  415 

iv.   19  .  .  24 

ii.   10  .  .  179 

ii.  120  .  .f3is 

iii.   52  .  .  200 

iv.   21  .  p.  16 

ii.   ii  .  .  167 

ii.  124  .  .  188 

(  400 

iv.   32  .  .1322 

ii.   12  .  .  132 

ii.  126  .  .  123 

»>•   59  '  -^368 

iv.   48  .  .  277 

ii.  137  .  .  15 

iii.   62  .  .  95 

iv.   53  •  •  4i7 

'   2<5  '  \t468 

INDEX. 


463 


Par. 

Sc.  Line 
ii.  584  • 

Par. 
•  5" 

Sc. 

ii. 

Line 
28  . 

Par. 
.  165 

Sc. 

iii. 

Line 
62  . 

Par. 

•  95 

•  434 

ii.  590  . 

.(6a) 

ii. 

H- 

.  300 

iii. 

75  • 

•  329 

.  69 

»•  593  • 

.  511 

144-' 

iii. 

78  . 

•  5" 

•+399 

ii.  601  . 

.  220 

ii. 

53  • 

•  97 

iii. 

91  . 

•  24 

.  297 
•  374 
•  343 

ii.  605  . 
ii.  607  . 
ii.  610  . 
ii.  622  . 

.  122 
.   22 
•  512 
•  363 

ii. 
ii. 
ii. 
ii. 

68  . 
69. 

73  • 

.  229 
•  174 
.  164 
•  (9) 

iii. 
iv. 
iv. 

94  . 
3  • 
5  • 

•  356 
.ta8S 
•tsi3 

•  4^7 

ii. 

93  • 

•ti37 

7  • 

.  200 

.+404 

ACT  III. 

ii. 

98  . 

•  *77. 

iv. 

25  • 

•f  5*3 

•ti59 

i.    8  . 

•  399 

ii. 

in  . 

.  229 

iv. 

I  J' 

•  279 

•  MS 

fio  . 

*'  i"  • 

|tsi3 
U468 

ii. 

131  • 

•  58 

iv. 

50  . 

.  142 

•60     i.   13  . 

•  173 

ii. 

176  . 

•  tss 

JV. 

Si  • 

•  43° 

•  438 
•  483  . 

i.  M. 
W 

•t5i3 

ii. 

178  . 

•  336 
.388* 

iv. 
iv. 

66  . 
93  • 

•t355 
•  ti78 

.  240 

i.   29  . 

•  (7) 

ii. 

184  . 

•  355 

iv. 

95  • 

.  284 

i-   33  • 

•t47° 

ii. 

190  . 

.t364 

iv. 

98  . 

•(13) 

•  370 

'•  a 

•  t3i8 

ii. 

faoo| 

\20lJ- 

•415 

iv. 

122  . 

•  24 

•  275 

i.   38  . 

.+368 

ii. 

207  . 

•  193 

iv. 

(133)' 

•  50° 

•t274 

.t276 

i.   44  . 
i.   49  . 

.  180 
.  482 

ii. 

214  . 

•is 

iv. 

iv. 

H4  • 

.  89 
.  297 

ii. 

22O  . 

•  339 

•  125 

i-  {^}. 

.  187 

ii. 

221  . 

•  49° 

iv. 

180  . 

•  485 

•  174 

i.   68  . 

.  508 

ii. 

227  . 

.t364 

iv. 

i95  • 

•ti59 

•  439 
•  37 
•  297 

i.   89  . 
i.   91  . 
i.  119  . 

.+469 
•  346 

.tl2I 

ii. 
ii. 

252  . 
268  . 

.  216 
IV") 

iv. 
iv. 
iv. 

202  . 
206  . 
207  . 

•  335 
•  492 
•  342 

.  42 
•t47a 
•  5" 

i.  124  . 
i.  120-58 
i.  163  . 

•t223 

•t33i 
•  342 

ii. 

312  . 
317  • 
350  • 

•t439 
•  354 
•  423 

iv. 

209  .   .  143 

ACT  IV. 

.   22 

i.  164  . 

•  22. 

ii. 

377  • 

•  425 

. 

10  . 

•  399 

•   24 

i.  168  . 

.  (8) 

ii. 

394  • 

.  f89 

ii. 

12  . 

It  1  70 

•  371 

i-  i73  • 

•  24 

ii. 

408  . 

.  501 

iii. 

ft466 

.  l64 

i.  174  . 

•  435 

111. 

3  • 

•  425 

7  • 

U497 

.t230 

i.  175  . 

4152 

iii. 

14  . 

((12) 

iii. 

22  . 

/  38 

1335 

\  221 

•  331 

i.  181  . 

.  68 

iii. 

20  . 

.t272 

iii. 

46  . 

.  229 

i.  182  . 
ii.    3  . 

•  337 

.  221 

iii. 

33  • 

f425 

iii. 

/561 
\6o/' 

«« 

•  49° 

ii.   22  . 

.  I58 

iii. 

38  • 

\  x 

1478 

iii. 

70  . 

•  371 

INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ACT  V. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

iv.  9-12  .  .^500 

vi.   ii  .  .f349 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ii.   92  .  .  81 

iv  (I7j     8 

vi.   13  .  .  405 

i.   81  .  .  184 

ii.  108  .  .  (15) 

\3iJ 

vi.   25  .  4244 

i.   85  ..  262 

ii.  120  .  .  128 

iv.   39  .  .  466 

vii.   13  .  .  273 

i.   87  ..  329 

ii.  162  .  .1314 

iv.   44  .  .t359 

vii.   16  .  .fi45 

i.  100  .  .  93 

ii.  183  .  .  319 

iv.   65  .  .  482 

vii.   17  .  .  460 

i  (I07^-   t299 

ii.  206  .  .1285 

v.    3  .  .  319 

/25l 

(131) 

ii.  226  .  .  460 

v-    5  •  -+335 

vu-  far  -  425 

i.  244  .  .|22^ 

ii.  241  .  .  479 

v.   75  ••  461 

vii.   28  .  .  89 

i.  252  .  4322 

ii  J24S1    208 

v.   83  .  .tsoi 

8,   ft469 
'   84  *  \t497 

vii.   48  ..   6 
vii.   50  .  .1325 
vii.   55  .  .t5i3 

i.  253  .  4148 
i.  258  .  .t5i3 
i.  261  .  .  430 

"'  U46r  *  298 
ii.  258  .  .  316 
ii.  266  .  .t494 

V'   {98}-   >tS13 

v.   99  .  .  +  178 

vii.   59  .  .tin 
vii.   60  .  .  482 

i.  •  265  .  .  469 
i.  268  .  .  360 

ii.  270  .  .tsi3 
ii.  276  .  .1297 

v.  102  .  .  495 

vii.   61  .  .+133 

i.  281  .  4513 

ii.  277  .  .  81 

v.  125  .  .  187 

vii.   63.  .$* 

i.  297  .  .  89 

ii.  307  .  .  479 

v.  128  .  .  146 

l*°J 

i.  298  .  .  241 

"'  324}'  '  5*3 

v.  129  .  .tsi3 

vii.   85  .  .  3°7 

i.  317  .  .  162 

ii.  337  .  .  (16) 

v.  133  •  •  187 
v.  141  .  .+501 

vii.  132  .  .  244 

"•©•  •» 

ii.  341  .  .  238 
ii.  342  .  .  166 

(  1  43-4!  . 

ii.   27  .  .  414 

ii.  343  .  .tsi3 

\iS2-3r  SI3 

vii>  {160}'  't28s 

ii.   28  .  ^456 

ii.  347  .  .no 

v-  ©•  •  l81 

vii.  159  .  .tuo 

ii.   29  .  .t439 

ii.  373  .  4513 

vii.  178  .  .  202 

ii.   51  .  .  89 

ii.  406  .  .180 

v<  213  •  -{til 

vii.  179  .  tp.  13 

ii.   63  .  .j2^4 

ii.  409  .  .  360 

v.  217  .  .  283 

vii.  181  .  4495 

ii.   64  .  .|2i6 

ii.  411  .  .  364 

(i)  W.  T.  v.  2.  82.  (2)  Macbeth,  iii.  i.  15.  (3)  Rich.  ///.  i.  a.  P.. 

(4)  Folio,  "sanctify  :  "  probably  "sanity." 

(5)  Perhaps  a  corruption  arising  from  a  repetition  of  "  oft  "  misspelt  "  oft,"  "  ost  " 
'  most." 

(6)  Macbeth,  iii.  5.  32.  (6a)  Compare  "free,"  Hamlet,  iii.  2.  252. 

(7)  Macbeth,  iii.  5.  7.  (8)  Macbeth,  iv.  3.  170.  (9)  Folio,  "hath."' 
(10)  Folio,  "favourites."                        (ii)  Hamlet,  iv.  7.  145. 

(12)  Folio,  "depends  and  rests."          (13)  Rich.  III.  iii.  i.  82. 
(14)  Folio,  "it,"  not  "its."  (15)  L.  L.  L.  v.  i.  103-4. 

(16)  Above,  283.—  Macbeth,  ii.  2.  56-7. 


INDEX. 

465 

i 

HENRY  IV. 

ACT  I. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Line 

Par. 

iii.   65  .  . 

49° 

i.  152  . 

•  374 

iii. 

68  . 

•  17 

Sc. 
i. 

Line 

21  . 

Par. 

•  474 

au  {-•}  . 

231 

i.  177  . 

(73 
•1432 

iii. 
iii. 

75  • 
92  . 

.  220 

.  160 

i. 

28  . 

•  87 

iv.   15  .  . 

10 

i.  257  . 

,-  466 

iii. 

104  . 

.  508 

ii. 

53  • 

•  237 

iv.  127  .  . 

175 

ii.   56  • 

.  419 

iv. 

2  . 

.  489 

ii. 

65  • 

•  419 

iv.  166  .  . 

178 

ii.   60  . 

•  243 

iv. 

27  . 

•  97 

ii. 

157  • 

.  419 

iv.  182  .  . 

301 

ii.   88  . 

•  24 

ii. 

174  . 

.   22 

iv.   222  .   . 

24 

ii.  loo  . 

.  168 

ACT  V. 

iii. 

15  • 

.  487 

iv.  233  .  . 

220 

ii.  118  . 

.  231 

i. 

2O  . 

.  490 

iii. 

17  • 

•  5" 

iv.  241  .  . 

220 

ii.  120  . 

.  168 

i. 

27  • 

•  507 

iii. 
iii. 

125  • 
146  . 

.  105 
.  426 

•  349 

iv.  278  .  . 
iv.  300  .  . 
iv.  312  .  . 

402 

216 

363 

ii.  123  . 
ii.  124  . 

/2l6 

•1476 
.  268 

i. 

i. 

50  • 
72  • 
90  . 

•  255 
•  342 

2 

iii. 
iii. 

iii. 

183  - 
234  • 
271  . 

•  374 
.  480 
•  457 

iv.  411  .  . 
iv.  442  .  . 
iv.  573  •  • 

363 
243 
299 

ii.  141  . 
ii.  149  . 
ii.  168  . 

.  67 
.  276 

ii. 

109  . 

116  . 
8  . 

•  505 
•   92 
.498 

iii.   50  . 

I  220 

ii. 

30  • 

•  338 

ACT  11 

ACT  III 

...  KFoi.n 

.  480 

ii. 

33  • 

•  477 

i. 

6  . 

'{411 

i.    5  .  . 

487 

'X  iii  j 

iii.  180  . 

.  301 

ii. 

62  . 

'{460 

i. 

ii  . 

.  400 

i.   17  .. 

343 

ii. 

71  . 

.  181 

i- 

12  . 

•  299 

i.   34  .  . 

466 

ACT  IV. 

ii. 

97  • 

•  489 

i. 

34  • 

.  182 

i.   48  .. 

220 

i.   24  . 

.  2OO 

ii. 

245  • 

•  230 

i- 

59  • 

.  227 

i.   60  .. 

363 

i.   52  • 

.   98 

iv. 

4  • 

.469 

J- 

80  . 

f  22 

•\26o 

i.   63  .. 
i.   67  .. 

499 

484 

i.  no  . 
i.  127  . 

.  290 
•  346 

iv. 
iv. 

5  • 

.  362 

•  472 

14  • 

i.   72  .  . 

5°5 

ii.   56  • 

•   24 

iv. 

87  • 

.  480 

ii. 

28  . 
30 

•  333 
.  24 

i.   74  .  . 
i.  loo  .  . 

44 
220 

ii.   83  - 

.  46l 

iv.- 

too  f 

(461 
X492 

iii. 

28  . 

.  219 

i.  131  .  . 

461 

iii.   38  . 

•(124 

iv. 

125  • 

.  270 

iii. 

fef} 

•  231 

S3 

iii.   44  . 

.  467 

v- 

14  . 

•  487 

2 

HENRY  IV. 

ACT  I. 

i.   99  .  . 

260 

i.  209  . 

•  17 

ii. 

212  . 

.  68 

hid. 

37  • 

2 

i.  in  . 

339 

ii.   23  . 

•  319 

ii. 

213  . 

{178 

i. 

3  • 

•  295 

i.  138  .  . 

425 

ii.   66  . 

.  M 

U43 

i. 

86  . 

.490 

i.  192  .  . 

129 

ii.   85  . 

•  335 

iii. 

27  . 

.  263 

i. 

87  . 

•  295  1   i.  199  •  • 

343 

ii.  130  . 

•  253 

iii. 

39  • 

•  354 

II  II 


466 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line 

Par. 

ACT 

III. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

iii.   59 
iii.   80  . 

.  260 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
i.   20  ..  80 

i.  107  . 
i.  117  . 

•  305 
.  284 

v.   77  . 
v.  126  . 

.  510 

.  202 

iii.   91 

•  87 

i.    22 

.  .  264 

i.  161  . 

•  477 

v.  153  • 

..468 

ACT 

II. 

»•   57 

.  .  309 

i.  183  . 

.  81 

v.  165  . 

•  343 

i.   70  . 

.  187 

ii.  199 

•  •  335 

i.  198  . 

•  383 

ACT  V. 

i.  186  . 

•  295 

ii.  200 

•  •  330 

i-  225  . 

•(202 
l36l 

i.  191  . 
i.  200  . 

•  3° 
•  378 

ii.  206 

ii-  213 

.  .  132 
•  •  32 

ii.  "3  • 
iii.   79  . 

•  471 
•  487 

i.   65  . 

i.   84  . 

.   22 
.  2O2 

ii.   59  • 

•  331 

ii.  304 

.  .  220 

iii.  120  . 

.  264 

ii.   24  . 

.   28 

iii.   42  . 

•  492 

ii.  310 

•  •  4°5 

iv.   20  . 

•  37 

ii.   66  . 

•  371 

iii.   65  . 
iv.   74  . 

•  492 
.  268 

ACT 
i.   32 

IV. 

.  .  287 

iv.   39  . 
iv.   91  . 

•  377 
.  198 

ii.   85  . 
ii.  128  . 

f!4I 

•\264 

iv.   83  . 

•  335 

i.   71 

•  •  17 

iv.  in  . 

•  5i 

iii.   93  . 

.  128 

iv.  305  . 

.199 

i.   98 

•  •  305 

v.   71  . 

•  474 

iii.   98  . 

•  343 

HENRY  V, 

ACT 

I. 

ii.   21 

.  .t44o 

ii.  167  . 

.  486 

ii.    2  . 

•  315 

Prol.  IJJ. 

.  481 

ii.   58 

.  .  +89 

ii.  172  . 

.  89 

ii.   23  . 

.  406 

99       12  • 

ii.   66 

•  •  4^9 

ii.  183  . 

.  480 

ii-   31  • 

.1342 

,,   16  . 

'  45O 

ii.   fg 

|6o 

•t265 

ii.  199  . 

•  467 

ii.   43  . 

•  ti7 

„   18  . 
i.    i  . 
i.    9. 

-  t3 
.  20 
.  419 

i^y 
ii.   71 
ii-   75 
ii.   88 

•  •  494 
.  .  489 
.  .  217 

ii.  203  . 

ii.  208  . 
ii.  248  . 

•  49° 
•  497 
.  469 

ii.   44  . 
ii.   70  . 
ii.   71  . 

•  (4) 
.t469 
-  (5) 

i-   15  • 

.  89 

»•   93 

•   -t223 

ii.  256  . 

jt349 

ii-  {73}- 

•t236 

'•   35  - 

.t4o6 

ii.   94 

.   .+440 

ii-  263, 

•t244 

ii.   '91  . 

.t270 

>•   43  • 

•tt99 

ii.   98 

•  -+343 

ii.  270  . 

•  (2) 

ii.   95  . 

i-   47  . 

/  tx 
Ita83 

\II2j 

•  •  458 

ii.  292  . 

.  460 

ii.  100  . 

•  3°9 

i-   53  • 

•  4H 

ii.  108 

•ti37 

ii-  305  • 

•  472 

ii.  102  . 

•  (6) 

i-   57  - 

•  4°3 

ii.  no 

.  .  89 

ii.  307  . 

•  203 

ii.  103  . 

•  56 

i.   72  . 
«•   75  • 
i.   81  . 

•  458 

ii.  114 
"•  132 
ii.  145 

•  •  154 
.  .  463 

ACT  II 
Prol.  18  . 

•  349 

ii.  104  . 
ii.  116  . 
ii.  123  . 

•  321 
.t47o 
•t45° 

i.   86  . 

26  . 

•  (3) 

ii.  128  . 

•  483 

ii.   12  . 

•  433 
•  136 

"'  {152} 

.  .  287 

»   32  . 

•  510 

ii.  129  . 

•  458 

ii.  153 

.  ^283 

i.    9  . 

•  t64 

ii.  132  . 

.ti36 

ii.   16  . 
ii.   28  . 

{  342 
(to 

ii.  154 

(462 
•1343 

i.   66  . 
i.  104  . 

.  428 

ii.  151  . 

•  398 
•t439 

U47     ii.  165 

.  .  446 

i.  107  . 

•  (4) 

ii.  159  • 

.  272 

INDEX. 


467 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ii.  159  .  .t467 

i.   14  ..  479 

(190] 

vi.   3  .  .t468 

ii.  168  .  .  468 

'•   33  ••  365 

i.  <i9i\.  .  378 
'193) 

vi.   9  .  .  (9) 

ii.  181  .  .  (7) 

iii.   6  .  .  490 

in.    9  •  -t474 

vi.   18  .  .  344 

iv-    i  •  .  335 

iii.   12  .  .  189 

1-  \257/'  '*469 

vi.   24  .  .  t66 

iv.   „.  .{(4) 

iii.   26  .  .490 

i.  305  .  .  317 

vi.   37  .  .  364 

(.104 

iv.   12  .  .  38 

iii.  {$.  .1174 

i.  319  •  •  69 

vii.   58  .  .  347 

ii.   13  .  .  468 

vii.   76  .  .  200 

iv.   20  .  .+  107 
iv.   25  .  .1301 
iv.   31  .  .  364 

iii.   46  .  .176 

V.    II  ..  484 

v.   12  .  .tia6 

ii.   23  .  .fsoi 
ii.   32  .  .t359 

vii.   81  .  .  189 
vii.   88  .  .  87 
vii.  121  .  ^364 

iv.  {$.  .415 

V.    22  .   .   89 

iii.    2  .  .343 

/I27\ 

iv.   50  .  .  225 

v.   24  ..  498 

iii.    9  -  -t469 

VU"  Ii33/'  '  (4) 

iv.   53  •  •  Si 
iv.   64  .  .  235  . 

v.   35  •  •  285 
v.   60  ..  148 
vi.  157  .  .  249 

«;•  *•«£ 

iii.   26  .  .  297 

('39) 

vii  Jl65*     M 

»v.  {77}.  .  414 

vi.  165  .  .  203 

iii.   33  .  .  503 

vn.  J1?1|.  •  (4) 
Vi  74/ 

iv.   80  .  .  460 
iv.   85  .  .490 

vi.  179  .  .  492 
vii.    9  .  .ti7i 

*  ($••- 

iii.   42  .  .  24 

vii.  142  .  .tis8 
vii.  184  .  .fin 

iv.   90  .  .  349 
iv.  101  .  .{3JJ 

ACT  IV. 

iii.   44..  .  348 
iii-   55  •  •  453 

vii.  188  .  .  377 
vii.  189  .  .  399 

iv.  103  .  .  350 

Prol.  8  .  .450 

iii.   59  .  .f474 

viii.   44  .  .  (4) 

iv.  105  .  .  195 

,,   21  ..  264 

iii.   63  .  .290 

viii.   84  .  .  (10) 

iv.  120  .  .  (4) 

,,   28  ..  251 

/  (8) 

viii.  116  .  .1462 

iv.   122  .   .  +  468 

36  ..  440 

70  '  up.  13 

viii.  122  .  .  (4) 

iv.  124  .  .  450 

38  ••  374 

iii.   77  .  .  297 

iv.  126  .  .  477 

48  ..  t66 

iii-   84  .  .{348 

ACT  V. 

ACT  III. 

i.   16  .  .  297 
i.   26  ..  303 
i-   29  .  .tsi3 

iii.   86.  .435 
iii.   95  .  .  t87 

Prol.{23}.  .t46a 
„    7  •  •  48o 

Prol.  6  .  .457 

i.   38  .  .457* 

iii.  107  .  .  492 

„   10  ..  444 

f  \ 

iii.  113  .  .  319 

1  A     .  2O2 

i.  \  yf-  '  465 

»    .34  * 

»   1J  •  •*I93 

iii.  120  .  .  315 

,,  4*  •  •  429 

„   18  .  .  89 

i.   45  .  .t5o5 

iii.  131  .  .tsi 

„   45  .  .ti4i 

„   21  .  .t466 

i.   89  .  .t299 

iii.  132  .  .  146 

i.   31  .  .  412 

„   30  .  .ti89 

i.  118  .  .  276 

iv.   23  .  .  201 

i.   93  .  .  501 

,.   32  .  4297 

i.  126  .  .  t87 

iv.   76  .  .  248 

ii.    4  .  .  464 

i.    9  .  .  490 

i.  128  .  .t28i 

iv.   81  .  .  172 

ii    10   It28s 

i.   13  .  .1228 

i.  181  .  .  429 

v.   17  ..  290 

'  \  4« 

468 

INDEX. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par.         Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

ii. 

28  . 

•  47i 

ii. 

73  • 

.  440 

ii. 

138 

•  t36i 

ii. 

475  • 

.  478 

ii. 

{$• 

.  287 

ii. 

78  . 
88  . 

.  361 

•  494 

ii. 

f368\' 

w- 

•  315 

ii. 

482  . 
491  . 

•+368 
•  458 

ii. 

68  . 

•  329 

ii. 

92  . 

•  ti3 

ii. 

398  - 

•  432 

Epil 

ii  . 

•  *93 

(i)  Folio,  "makes."  (2)  Perhaps,  "hence,"  from  home. — Macbeth,  iii.  3.  36. 

(3)  Macbeth,  ii.  2.  56-7.  (4)  Folio,  "and."  (5)  Macbeth,  iii.  5.  32. 

(5)  Malone,  "while  we  force."  Perhaps,  more  probably,  "we'll"  is  to  be  repeated. 

(6)  J.  C.  i.  3.  22.  (7)  Hamlet,  \.  2.  182.  (8)  A.  Y.  L.  iii.  i.  18. 

(9)  A.  W.  v.  i.  297.  (10)  Perhaps  "  sides"  (486)  is  prolonged. 


i  HENRY  VI. 


ACT  I 

iv. 

28  . 

.  489 

ACT 

III. 

i. 

175 

.  .  467 

i. 

2  . 

•  529 

iv. 

54  • 

•  43° 

>•   13 

•  •  497 

iii. 

33 

.  .  170 

i. 

60  . 

.  489 

V. 

31  • 

.  484 

i.   28 

•  •  4H 

iii. 

46 

.  .  170 

i. 

71  • 

.  492 

V. 

36. 

•  295 

i-   34 

.  .  1  20 

iv. 

17 

.  in 

i. 

76  . 

•  485 

vi. 

4  • 

•  479 

i-   Si 

.  •  484 

V. 

t,  55 

•  •  231 

i. 

81  . 

•  492 

vi. 

12  . 

.  501 

i.  112 

.  .  484 

V. 

3° 

•  •  319 

(92) 

vi. 

16  . 

•  348 

i.  142 

.  .  487 

vi. 

6-9 

.  .  231 

*• 

>93l' 

•  456 

vi. 

26  . 

•  425 

i-  143 

.  .  490 

vii. 

34 

.  .  172 

i- 

"5  • 

•  440 

vi. 

27  . 

•  505 

ii.    9 

•  •  335 

vii. 

72 

.   .    2 

'• 

126  . 

•  370 

vi. 

70  . 

.  489 

ii.   25 

.  .  150 

ACT 

V. 

ii. 

i  . 

.  217 

ACT  II 

ii.  104 

.  .  469 

ii. 
ii. 

ii. 

19  . 
54  • 

.  363 

•  492 
.  156 

i. 

30  • 
46  . 

•  362 
•  299 

ii.  123 
ii.  124 

'  '1335 
.  .  24 

iii. 
iii. 

21 

41 
82 

•  •  479 

.   .  !64 

(230 

i. 

53  • 

•  275 

*  *352 

ii. 

74  • 

I 

i. 

70  . 

.  178 

iii.    3 

.  .  492 

iii. 

98 

•  •  52 

ii. 

77  • 

.  89 

i. 

•  325 

iii.   20 

.  .  92 

iii. 

177 

•  •  247 

ii. 

IOI  . 

•  498 

iii. 

28  . 

.  466 

iii.   31 

.  .  92 

iii. 

183 

•  •  342 

iii. 
iii. 

5  • 
ii  . 

.  487 

•  474 

iii. 

58  • 
91  . 

.  321 
•  471 

iii.   72 
iv.   29 

.  .  418 
.  .  178 

iv. 

iv. 

8 

22 

.  .  295 

.  .  168 

iii. 

20  . 

.  488 

iv. 

98  . 

•  371 

ACT 

IV. 

iv. 

25 

•  •  13 

iii. 

52  • 

•  320 

V. 

37  • 

•  3" 

i.   28 

.  .  287 

iv. 

57 

.  .  463 

iii. 

80  . 

.  480 

V. 

55  • 

•  244 

i.   38 

•  •  17 

iv. 

75 

.  .  105 

iii. 

90  . 
91  . 

•  382 
•  492 

V. 

/75\ 
\76J- 

•  485 

i.   70 
i.  113 

.  .  484 
•  •  348 

iv. 

V. 

156 
18 

.  .  490 

.   .  122 

iv. 

IO  . 

.  226 

V. 

89  . 

•  360 

i.  126 

.  .  490 

V. 

55 

.  .  479 

iv. 

16  . 

•  505 

V. 

96  . 

•  349 

i.  166 

.  .  467 

V. 

64 

•  •  5°5 

INDEX. 

469 

2  HENRY  VI. 

ACT  I. 

Sc.  Line 

Par.    Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

iv.   25  . 

•  251 

i.  301  • 

•  337 

i.  117  . 

•  213 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

iv.   78  . 

.  466 

i.  348  • 

•  463 

i.  129  . 

.  484 

i.    2  . 

•  451 

ACT  II 

ii.    3  • 

.  405 

i-  i35  • 

•  443 

i.    9  . 
i.   61  . 

•  247 
.  168 

»•   3  • 

J347 
\4" 

ii.   ii  . 
ii.   31  • 

•  335 
.  190 

ii.    7  . 
ii.   59  . 

•  5°3 
.  402 

i.   83  . 

.  121 

i.    22  . 

.  226 

ii.   84  • 

•  343 

ii.   96  . 

.  178 

i.  150  . 
i.  166  . 

.  296 
•  376 

i.   68  . 

fi8o 
1335 

ii.   89  . 

.  156 

ii.  103  . 

.  169 

,/TQ 

i.  206  . 
i.  208  . 

•  477 
.  501 

i.   88  . 
J-   93  • 

.  168 
.  86 

ii.  119  . 

.  501 

vi.    3  . 
vi.   23  . 

.   I  DO 

.  268 

i.  225  . 
i.  233  . 

.  289 
.  280 

i.   94  • 
i.   99  . 

•  349 
.  128 

ii.  139  • 
ii.  178  .' 

•  451 

•   3 

vii.  in  . 
viii.   36  . 

•  193 
•  477 

i.  247  . 
ii.   36  • 

•  333 
.  89 

ii.   6  . 

«•  u- 

.  510 
•  511 

ii.  217  . 
ii.  257  . 

.  20 
.  160 

ix.    i  . 

ix-   33  • 

.  84 
•  193 

ii.   57  • 

.  289 

»•   55  • 

•  485 

ii.  258  . 

.  490 

ACT 

V. 

.. 

|n6 

iii.   20  . 

.  456 

ii.  286  . 

•  4° 

i.   16 

.  168 

5 

'U35 

iv.    3  . 

•  463 

ii.  295  . 

.298 

i.   32 

.  5" 

ii.   69  . 

.  209 

iv.   52  . 

•  475 

ii.  365  • 

.  460 

i.   60 

•  335 

ii.   79  . 

.  89 

iv.   63  . 

.  446 

ii.  401  . 

.  158 

i-  H3 

.  432 

ii.  80-2  . 
ii.   97  • 

•  479 
•  470 

ACT  III. 
i.   9  .  .  132 

ACT  IV. 

»•  153 
i.  196 

.  264 
•  352 

iii.   31  . 

.  382 

i.   66  . 

•  57 

i-    3  • 

.  260 

i.  211 

.  .  478 

iii.   63  . 

'\47i 

i.  126  . 

.  326 

i.   85  . 

•  338 

»•   45 

•  .478 

Hi.  153  • 

.  484 

i.  160  . 

•  45i 

i.   87  . 

.  478 

ii.   86 

.  •  45i 

iii.  167  . 

•  409 

i.  253  • 

.  264 

i.  113  • 

•  *75 

iii.    i 

•  •  243 

3  HENRY  VI. 

ACT 

I.        iv.   10  . 

.  226 

i.   80 

•  430 

v.    3 

.  .  178 

i.  215  . 

•  476 

iv.  103 

.  46o 

i.   83 

•  247 

v.   42 

.  .306 

i.  224 

.  466 

iv.  115 

.  218 

i.  106 

•  295 

v.   60 

•  •  384 

ii.   38 

.  478 

iv.  142 

•  49° 

i.  109 

.  .  220 

vi.   42 

.  .  229 

ii.   41 

.  467 

iv.  150 

.  126 

i.  no 

•  •  45i 

vi.   56 

•  -419* 

ii.   43 

•  509 

ACT 

II. 

ii.  142 

.  .  428 

vi.   86 

•  •  244 

ii.   47 

.{  95 

i.    2 

•  •  295 

ii.  i57 

.  .  156 

ACT 

III. 

(116 

i.   16 

.  .  263 

iii.   27 

.  .  192 

i.   10 

•  •  348 

iv.    6 

•  •  243 

i.   46 

iii.   4° 
iii.   56 

•  •  423 
•  •  44i 

i.   ii 

.  .(20 
•(.152 

470 

INDEX. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Tort 

ACT 

IV. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

i.   31  . 
i.   51  • 
ii.   92  . 

.  189 

•  255 
.  40 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
i.   17  •  •  480 
i-   92  •  •  45i 

vii.   30 

.  .(93 

lass 

.  .  489 

iii.   14  . 
iii.   18  . 
iv.   34  . 

.igSrt 
•  477 
•  37 

ii.  137  . 

•  J94 

fz7o 

ii.  143  . 

.  223 

i.  115 

•  •  25 

vii.   32 

•  -J477 

lv-   35  • 

1434 

iii.   14  . 
iii-   35  • 

•  394 
•  J?i 

i.  131 
ii.    2 

•  •  451 

ins 
(105 

ACT 
i.   20 

V. 
•  •  451 

v.  '38  . 
vi.   40  . 

-  !3 

•  430 

hi.   87  . 
iii.  189  . 

.  265 

iii.      2 

iii.   14 

.  220 

-484 

i-   57 
i.   97 

•  •  430 
-  -  373 

vi.   41  . 
vii.    6  . 
vii.    7  . 

•  484 
.  148 
•  **3 

iii.  225  • 

.  226 

iii-   55 
iv.   12 

•  478 
.  I46 

ii-   45 
iii.    8 

•  •  312 
.  .  198 

vii.   10  . 
vii.   21  . 

•  469 

•  37r 

iii.  226  . 

.  291 

iv.   26  . 

•  492 

iii.   9 

•  •  251 

vii.   34  . 

.  289 

HENRY  VIII. 

ACT  I 

ii.  212  . 

•  55 

iv.   31 

.  301 

ii.  405  • 

.  90 

.   18  . 

.  228 

iii.   50  . 

•  24 

iv.   49 

.  18 

ii.  431  . 

.  168 

.   60  . 

•  492 

iv.   57  . 

•  455 

iv.   86 

.  187 

»•  435  - 

•  424 

.  100-5  • 

.  467 

ACT  II. 

iv.  112 

•  295 

ii.  438  - 

•  424 

•  X45- 

(156 

i-   33  - 

•  34i 

iv.  144  . 

.  90 

ii.  ("2j- 
l45U 

•  455 

U97 

i.   42  . 

•  376 

•  *53  • 

\1AA 

159  • 
179  . 

i 
.  200 

i-   52  . 
i.   67. 

-  469 
•  455 

iv.  178  . 
iv.  204  . 

•  49i 

•  395 

ii.  447  • 
ii.  452  . 

•  455 
468 

196  . 

394 

i-   85  . 

.  499 

iv.  242  . 

.  90 

ii.   18  . 

420 

i.   97  . 

•  455 

ACT  IV 

ii.   32  . 
ii.   40  . 

460 
X45 

i.  100  . 
i.  122  . 

.  469 
•  455 

ACT  III. 

•  f  Order  ofl 
'•  i  Coron.  I202 

"•   55  • 

460 

i.  127  . 

•  455 

i-   39  - 

•  484 

i.    22  .. 

469 

ii.   85  . 

486 

i.  141  . 

•  342 

i-   45  • 

2 

i.   56  .. 

484 

ii.   86  .  . 

37i 

iii.   15  . 

.  290 

i.  102  . 

•  236 

i.   88  .. 

"3 

ii.   95  .  . 

/  4 

ii.   16  . 

•  397 

i.  134  . 

.419^ 

i.   91  •  • 

376 

M 

1372 

iii.   37  . 

.  226 

ii.  117  . 

•  485 

H.   32  .  . 

200 

11.    114  .    . 

499 

iii.   59  . 

•  455 

ii.  160  . 

•  325 

ii.   43  .  . 

J73 

11.  118  .  . 

492 

iii.   87  . 

•  492 

ii.  249  . 

•  433 

ii.  51-80.  . 

455 

ii.  149  •  • 
ii.  168  .  . 

492 
SGI 

•   f  Stage 
V'  1  Dirctn 

.}'94 

ii.  340  . 
"•  347  • 

•  498 
•  93 

ii.   55  •  • 
ii.   96  .  . 

3oi 
1  80 

ii.  179  •  • 

501 

iv.   14  . 

•  350 

ii.  360  . 

•  87 

ii.  126  .  . 

95 

ii.  197  •  • 

399 

iv.   30  . 

•  343 

ii.  368  . 

•  424 

ii.  148  .  . 

92 

INDEX. 


471 


ACT  V 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

i.   66 

•  •  364 

ii. 

126  .  . 

244 

iii. 

173  • 

•  430 

i.   19  . 

414 

i.  106 

.  .  381 

iii. 

18  .  . 

419 

iii. 

175  • 

•  338 

»•   34  • 

400 

i.  169 

•  •  356 

iii. 

131  •  • 

216 

iv. 

i  . 

•  320 

i.   50  . 

400 

i.  174 

.  .  405 

iii. 

168  .  . 

456 

'  KING  JOHN. 

ACT  I. 

i-  37i 

.  .  294 

iv. 

29  .  . 

492  1   ii. 

258  . 

•  390 

i.   31  . 
i.  119  . 

•  350 
.  269 

i.  396 
i.  421 

.  .  92 
.  .  492 

iv. 
iv. 

35  •  • 
56  .  . 

490 

1  66 

iii. 

94  • 

1£ 

i.  144  . 

.  185 

i.  471 

•  •  294 

iv. 

78.  . 

461 

i.  161  . 

.  506 

i.  560 

.  .  474 

iv. 

123  .  . 

494 

ACT 

v. 

i.  181  . 

.  87 

i-  567 

•  •  193 

iv. 

145  •  • 

220 

i.  242  . 

.  261 

i.  568 

.  .  216 

ii. 

39  • 
42  • 

•  350 

•  337 

ACT  11 

»•  575 

•  •  399 
(228 
'.  '(426 

i. 

ACT  IV. 

61  .  . 

342 

ii. 
ii. 

46  • 
83- 

•  447 
•  457 

»•   34  • 
i.   52  • 

•  17 
.  267 

i-  597 

.  .  191 

i. 

68-76.  . 
75  •  • 

326 
252 

ii. 

91  . 
104  . 

.  236 
.  489" 

i-   73  • 

•  342 

ACT 

III. 

i. 

86  .  . 

I58 

ii. 

138  . 

•  350 

i.  109  . 
i-  133  • 
i.  177  • 

.  267 
.  348 
•  473 

»•   39 
i.   92 
i.  177 

.  .  269 
.  .  128 
.  .  491 

ii. 
ii. 

27  •  • 
30  .  . 
42  .  . 

422 
I64 
51 

ii. 
iv. 

146  . 
157  • 
7  • 

•  294 
.  465 
•  433 

i.  216  . 

|247 

*U>5 

i.  295 

.  .  412 

ii. 

50  .  . 

214 

iv. 

5i  • 

.  126 

vi. 

26  . 

.  186 

i.  220  . 

•  439 

i.  299 

•  •  239 

ii. 

148  .  . 

lio 

i.  250  . 

•  415 

i.  327 

.  .  196 

' 

44  • 

•  X3X 

i.  264  . 
i.  271  . 

•  394 
•  4*7 

ii.   17 

1475 
•\48o 

ii. 

ii. 

165  .  . 

189  .  . 

410 

200 

vi. 
vii. 

55  • 

22  . 

.  223 
.  264 

i.  289  . 

|466 

iii.   8 
iii.   31 

•  •  52 

ii. 

199  .  . 
200  . 

87 

474 

vii. 
vii. 

35  • 
59  • 

.  480 
•  243 

>•  357  - 

•  433 

iii.   52 

•  •  374 

ii. 

257  • 

447  1  vii. 

64  . 

.  81 

JULIUS  CESAR. 

ACT  I 

i.  fs° 

[•.  .  229 

f. 

79  • 

1263     ii. 

41  . 

.  16 

i-    3  • 

•   9 

*** 

ii. 

i  • 

469  |   ii- 

48  . 

•  343 

/.\ 

(55 

I  .  218 

ii. 

9  • 

t3i8     ii. 

71  • 

.  180 

'•  W' 

.  232     ••  is6 

ii. 

19  . 

460 

ii. 

76  . 

.  26 

i.  42. 

.  t85  !   i-   57 

.  .  512 

ii. 

28  . 

tw 

ii. 

101 

•ti33 

i.  48  . 

.  t29     i.   63 

.   .   22 

,  x 

ii. 

no 

.  198 

i.   50  • 

.  283     i.   66 

.   .  466 

ii. 

\33)' 

280 

114 

.  501 

472 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ii.  124  .  .+228 

iii.  120  .  .  257 

i.  313  .  .  382 

i.  159  •  •  (6) 

ii.  142  .  .  325 

iii.  124  ..   2 

i.  316  .  .  359 

i.  171  .  .  476 

ii.  160  .  p.  16 

iii.  134  .  .  240 

ii.   37  .  .  494 

i.  173  .  .+469 

ii.  162  .  .  tss 

iii.  138  .  .f335 

ii.   38  .  .+349 

i.  196  .  .  (7) 

ii.  173  .  .  350 

iii.  144  .  .  128 

ii.   42  .  4322 

i.  208  .  .  225 

ii.  174  .  .  280 

iii.  148  .  .t335 

ii.   76  .  .  487 

i.  209  .  .  344 

ii.  181  .  tigSrt 

iii.  154  .  .  333 

ii.   80  .  .{49° 

i.  215  .  .  49o 

ii.  193  .  .fi76 

U97 

i.  231  .  .+469 

ii.  197  •  •  (i) 

ACT  II. 

ii.  101  .  .  511 

i.  268  .  .+193 

ii.  205  .  .421 
ii.  207  .  .  144 

»•   {5}-  •  73* 

ii.  114  .  .  344 
ii.  117  .  .  65 

i.  274  .  .  283 
i.  281  .  .  512 

ii.  311  .  .  421 

i.   50  ..  343 

ii.  119  .  4356 

i.  289  .  .  (8) 

ii.  231  .  .  12 

i-   75  •  -t307 

ii.  129  .  .+203 

i.  295  .  .  270 

ii.  256  .  .  90 

i.   81  .  .  494 
i.   83  ..  290 

ii.  331  .  .  208 

-  a  -35 

ii-  {^}-  •  474 

ii.  284  .  |  ^ 

i.   91  .  .1123 

191 

ii.   29  .  .t335 

(106) 

i.  106  .  .112 

iv.    3  •  •  (5) 

ii.  311  .  .  233 

i.  108  .  .  378 
i.  123  .  .  253 

iv-  {33|-  .t233 

ii.   84  .  .  301 

ii.  314  .  .  244 

i.  125  .  .  390 

iv.  |*7j.  •  513 

ii.   96  .  .  287 

ii.  316  .  .  279 

it  I35   .1356 

ii.  115  .  .  453 

iii.    4  •  -442 

i.  136  .  .  37o 

ACT  III. 

ii.  121  .  .  469 

iii.   14  ..   6 

i  I152*   **„ 

i.   17  .  .  474 

ii.  125  .  4281 

iii.   21  .  .  264 

'•  \i53f-  't513 

i.   18  .  .  485 

ii.  187  .  .  ii 

iii.   22  .  .  (3) 

i.  157  •  •  172 

i.   23  ..  498 

ii.  192  .  .  487 

iii.   39  •  •  4°5 

i.  160  .  .  (3) 

i-   30  -.  247 

ii.  231  .  .  475 

iii.   42  .  .  86 
iii.   47  .  .+223 

i.  {$}.  .468 

i.  {39}.  .  28i 
(40) 

ii.  254  .  .  202 
ii.  266  .  .  453 

iii.   60  .  .  159 

i.  194  •  .t466 

.   (4o\ 

ii.  275  .  .  414 

iii.   64  .  .  158 
iii.   65  .  .  290 

i-  196  •  .  158 
i.  208  .  .  474 

1<  \AI)'  '  279 
i.   92  .  ^287 

iii.   13  .  4230 
iii.   20  .  .  220 

,  « 

i.  209  .  .  5I2 

i.   95  .  .tn8 

>»•  {„}•  •  5" 

i.  216  .  .  263 

i.  loo  .  .1204 

ACT  IV. 

iii.   77  .   p.  13 

i.  224  .  .  397 

i.  121  .  .  ii 

iii.   82  .  .1137 

i.  230  .  .  430 

i.  137  .  .^469 

i.    2  .  .1-469 

iii.   87  .  .  315 
"i.  {£}•  -236 

i.  238  .  .  343 

(t497 
i.  258  .  j  or 

Lr-'fisi 

i.  143  .  .  189 

i.   12  ..   3 
i.   23  ..  466 
i.   28  ..  479 

iii.  •!IOI>.    (A] 

usoi 

i.  144  .  .  t69 

i.   41  ..  199 

(102)    W 

i.  291  .  .+513 

i-  155  •  -t28o 

i.   47  .  .  474 

iii.  117  •  .  279 

i.  309  .  ^244 

i-  157  •  •  236 

ii.    5  .  .  303 

INDEX. 


473 


Sc.     Line      Par. 
ii.       26  .     .1291 

ii.       51  .     .t494 
iii.         9  .     .483 

Sc.     Line      Par. 
iii.     201  .     -t470 
iii.     231  .     .  480 
iii.     237  .     .  478 

Sc.     Line      Par. 
i.     {$.     .15,, 

i.       44  .     .  482 
i        A<  .         ^06 

Sc.     Line      Par. 
iii.       32  .     .506 

iii.       38  .     .  178 
iii.    {$.    .,5.3 

iii.       10  .     .+356 

iii.     241  .     .  295 

i.         4^    .           3*-"-' 

iii.       85  .     .  212 

iii.       19  .     .  217 

iii.     255  .     .     51 

i-     {Js}'    >t513 

iii          6       ftl59 

/37\ 

iii.     261  .     .t323 

i.      60  ..      2 

\    16 

'     \38f     '  5'4 

iii.  (363}.     •  5i3 

i.       70  ..  506 

iii.       97  .     .t466 

iii.     -|^|.     .t244 

(264) 

i.      72  .     .114 

iii.       99  •     -     '3 

iii.     270  .     .t28i 

iv.       12  .     .  420 

iii.       73  .     .  350 

iii.     271  .     .  371 

i.     {?«}.     .  233 

iv.       30  .     .  466 

iii.       95  .     .     24 

iii.     273  .     .  456 

i.      80  ..  379 

iv.       32  .     .t295 

iii.     102  .     .    (9) 

iii.     280  .     .  (10) 

i.      83  .     .f263 

v.         3  .     .ti36 

iii    fxlll      (*2^3 

i.       87  .     .ti07 

v.       14  .     -t283 

iii.     142  .     .t497 

ACT  V. 

i.       96  ..  442 

V.         22    .       .t4I4 

iii.     153  .     .t469 

i.         i  .     .  474 

i.     108  .     .tsoo 

v.      35  •     •  232 

iii.     156  .     .  380 

i.     in  .     .tsi3 

v.       35  •     •  123 

iii.     157  .     .t466 

l-   \27r   -tsi3 

iii.         7  •     -495 

v.       38  .     -457« 

iii.     179  .     .  486 

i.      33  ••  4" 

iii.      25  .     .  295 

v.       69  ..  118 

(0  i  Hen.  IV.  iii.  2.  16.                 (2)  Folio,  "  and."                 (3)  Rich.  III.  v.  3-  156. 
(4)  Play  on  "  bond.  "—  Macbeth  iii.  2.  49  ;  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  ,7 
(5)  Rich.  III.  iv.  4.  444.              (6)  M.  of  V.  iii.  2.  61                 (7)  A.  Y.  L.  i   3-  35. 
(8)  Perhaps  i.  2.  15(5.                 (9)  Folio,  "  Pluto's."      See  Introduction,  p.  16,  note. 
(10)  Tempest,  i.  2.  213. 

LEAR. 

ACT  I. 

(  87) 

i.     150  .     .tsoi 

i.     195  •     •    (i) 

i.      36  -     -t3i5 
^     {07}       «* 

i.  {  94>.     .t4o8 

\I26» 

i.      99  ••  384 

i.     153  .     ^364 
i.  {'JJ.     .458 
i.     162  .     .t5i3 

i.     207  .     .  294 
i.     213  .     .t4oi 

'•  &  •  »» 

i.      46  .     .fsoi 

.     .tsoo 

i.     163  .     .  200 

i.     217  .     .  t38 

i.      50  .     .1319 

(n8\ 

i.     178  .     .  382 

i.       54  .     4469 

i.  li^k     ^468 

i      181  .     .+469 

*'     223  •    \f29O 

i.       56  .     .tsi2 
i.       74  •     -^284 
i.       77  .     .t342 

WJ 

ft497 
i.     137  .    <    or 
Usoi 

i.       183    .      .t2I2 

'•  {£}•  •*« 

i.     225  .     .  458 

i.     226  .    -^6g 

i.       78  .     .1469 

i.     139  .     .t497 

i.     198  .     ^469 

i.    227  .     .  387 

i.       80  ..  tn 

i.     147  .     .  458 

i.     203  .     4297 

i.     228  .     .tsoi 

474 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

i-  I228l    t2,2 
1229/'   <T252 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

iv.  194  .  4203 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
i.   63  ..  267 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

iii.   21  .  .  tS5 

'•  239  .  .1343 

iv.  197  .  .  (4) 

i.   68  .  ,t439 

iv.   2  .  .f468 

iv.  204  .  .  213 

i.   72  ••  294 

iv.   27  .  .  377 

1-  \25oJ-  'f469 

iv.  223  .  1*434 

i.  {?2}.  -f2SI 

iv.   35  •  •  87 

i.  251  .  4287 

*•  '5 
iv.  224  .  457« 

i.   77  •  -t3o6 

iv.   42  .  .  401 

i.  262  .  .  375 
i.  264  .  .  77 

iv.  225  .  .f36o 
iv.  236  .  .  228 

i.   91  •  -t4oi 
i.   94  •  •  478 

iv.   64  .  .  f37 
iv.   65  .  .  (4) 

i.  271  .  .  13 

- 

iv.   68  .  .  188 

i.  272  .  .  414 

iv.  242  .  .  4I8 

i-   97  •  -j4^ 

iv.   90  .  .  480 

iv.  261  .  .  458 

i.  304  .  .f442 
ii-   4  •  •  456 

iv.  265  .  .fsoi 

• 

;•  {£}•  •«• 

iv.   91  .  .  47i 
iv.  ioi  .  .tsi3 

(484 

iv.  270  .  .  439 

i.  100  .  .  301 

iv.  102  .  .  480 

'  /  Sic 

iv.  „.  .  .{354 

i.  in  .  .  482 
i.  »3  •  .ti74 

iv.  107  .  .  69 
iv,  in   .  ii 

i.  114  .  .  483 

ii  {  30! 

iv-  283  .  {f478 

i.  126  .  .t468 

iv.  {"3}.  .  49o 

Il25j' 

iv.  297  .  .  48o 

i.  129  .  .t479 

iv.  134  .  .  49o 

ii.   44  .  .{  (2> 

iv.  299  .  .f5n 

ii.   54  •  •  468 

iv.  145  .  .  366 

ii.   77  •  •  381 
ii-   87  .  .t348 

iv-  305  •  .  439 
iv.  306  .  .  423 

ii.   80  .  .  24 
if.   82  .  .  12 

iv.  148  .  .+513 
iv-  157  •  •  458 

ii-   89  .  .  i34 

iv.  324  .  .  438 

'   ^Ir 

iv.  {*7°}.  .tsi3 

»•   93  •  •  343 
ii.  106  .  .f22o 

iv.  328  .  .   3 
iv.  332  .  .  463 
iv.  347  .  .tsoi 

ii.   88  .  .  200 
ii.  106  .  .  (4) 
ii.  107  .  .  412 

iv.  210  .  .  +95 
iv.  215  .  .  417 

ii.  161  .{tp'(35 

iv-  349  •  •  440 

ii.  109  .  .  492 

iv.   220  .   .  484 

ii.  164  .  .4i9a 

iv.  362  .  .  48o 

ii.  112  .  .  490 

iV-  {245}'   '  458 

ii.  197  •  •  458 

iv.  365  •  •  483 

"'  {128}'  '  279 

iv.  251  .  457<z 

iii.    i  .  .178 

iv.  366  .  .  437 

ii.  128  .  .  290 

iv.  253  .  .tsi3 

iii.   21  .  .  482 
iii-   65  .  4501 
iv.   26  .  .t274 

v.   14  ..  401 
v-   35  •  .t3i9 
v.   36  ..  299 

ii.  135  •  •  478 
ii.  139  .  .  290 
ii.  150  .  .  +9 

iv.  254  .  .t494 
iv.  255  .  4128 
iv.  271  .  .  479 

iv.   40  .  .f28i 

v-   51  •  -t329 

ii.  153  •  -+494 

iv.  274  .  .  476 

1V*  \64r  •  28° 

ACT  II. 

it.  154  •  •  399 

iv.  {*75}.  •  247 

iv.  in  .  .  81 
(  (4) 

IV.   112  .  -iflOI 
1363 

iv.  114  .  .  182 

i.   28  .  .t469 
i-   32  ..  512 
i.   37  .  .  485 
i.   41  -.  178 

ii-  i55  •  •  tn 
ii.  172  .  .  458 
ii.  177  •  -t468 
iii-    5  •  ^307 
iii.    7  .  .  ii 

iv.  279  .  4281 
iv.  290  .  .  507 

iv.  115  ..  303 

i.   47  ••  287 

iv.  303  .  1  457 

»v.  138  .  .  24 

i-   57  •  -ti36 

"'•  {20}-  -t4« 

iv.  309  .  4470 

INDEX. 


475 


ACT  III. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
iv.  •j1^}'.  .  260 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
ii.   62  .  .  474 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
vi.  196  .  .  479 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ii.   63  .  .  438 

vi.  212  .  .tsi3 

i.    2  .  .t494 

v.   8  .  .  24 

ii.   64  .  .  508 

vi.  214  .  p.  13 

i.    5  .  .  400 

v.   23  .  .f443 

ii.   79  .  .  443 

vi.  219  .  .  287 

i.   ii  ..  434 

v.   40  ..  290 

jj    /92J     . 

vi  (224)   . 

,  ^ 

vi.   96  .  .  191 

\93>' 

(225)'  *™  3 

i.  kj.  .  266 

vi.  105  .  .  290 

ii.   94  .  .t994 

vi.  226  .  .  372 

i.   33  •  •  too 

vi.  117  .  .  294 

iii.    8  .  4274 

vi.  229  .  .tiSg 

iii.   16  .  .  264 

i.  {35\   .ta8l 

vi.  121  .  .  254 

VI.   246  .   "l  /; 

l36J 

vii.   17  .  .  t9o 

iii.   24  .  .  510 

i.   38  ••  438 

vii.   30  .  •  335 

iii.   41  .  t68<* 

vi.  253  .  .  319 

i.   39  .  .  460 

vii.   45  .  .290 

iii.   44  -  -t458 

vi.  256  .  .  498 

i.   42  ••  5i3 

iv.    8  .  .  307 

vi.  259  .  .t5i3 

*   Q 

vii.  {5°}.  .  478 

* 

L  46  •  .{%* 

iv.    9  .  .  93 

vi.  266  .  .-{33 

vii.   54  •  •  (8) 

iv.   17  .  .  428 

U95 

i.   52  ..  186 

vii.   64  .  .  428 

iv.   20  .  .  484 

vi.  282  .  .  492 

i-  {53}.  .  (6) 

vii.   65  .  .  433 

iv.   26  .  •{  /  \ 

vi.  284  .  .  294 

ii.    5  .  .457* 

vii.   69  .  .+319 

iv.   28  .  .  497 

vi.  288  .  .  342 
v»i-    4  •  -395 

ii.    8  .  .  (7) 

vii.  {f^}-  •  260 

v.    3  •  •  479 

vii.    9  .  .176 

ii.   54  .  4ioa 

vii.   91  .  .  482 

v.   13  .  .(460 

vii.   17  .  .  430 

ii.   59  .  .1201 

(294 

ii.   61  .  .  ti3 

vii.  103  .  .f457 

v.   24  .  .  470 

vii-   35  •  •  477 

ii.   64  .  .  tn 

ACT  IV. 

vi.    3  .  .   2 

vii-   36  .  '{J°3 

H-   65  '  {t3378 

i.   36  .  457<z 

vi.    8  .  .  232 
vi.   14  .  .t275 

vii.   52  .  .1480 
vii.   62  .  .511 

ii.   74  •  •  96 
ii.   92  .  .  486 

i.   47  .  .t274 

•'•  -US 

vi.   21  .  .  375 
vi.  {32j    232 

vii.   65  .  .  468 
vii.   67  .  .  406 

iii.   14  .  .  290 
iii.   19  .  .  in 

i.   52  .  .  182 

vi.   33  .  .  411 

vii.   78  .  .t437 

iii.   22  .  .f343 
iv.   12  .  .+468 
iv.   15  .  .fi07 

i.   54  .  .  226 
i.   73  .  .+322 
i.   78  .  .ti29 

vi.   38  .  .  446 

Vi.    41  .   .  212 

vi.   45  .  .  145 

vii.   79.  .(76 
x      \47* 
vii.   83  .  .1513 

iv.   25  .  .t244 

ii.    2  .  .  305 

vi.   54  .  .344 

ACT  V. 

iv.   59  .  .  24 
iv.   61  .  .  303 

ii.    6  .  .t494 
ii.   10  .  .  395 

vi.   58  .  .  24 
vi.   61  .  .f2oo 

(  '3 

1.    20  .   .<222 
U38 

iv.   65  .  .  335 

"'  {23}'  '  235 

vi.   68  .  ,t468 

i.   26  ..  290 

iv.   76  .  .  467 

ii.   26  .  .  482 

vi.   71  .  .  440 

i.   28  ..  477 

iv.   92  .  .  493 

ii.   32  .  .  228 

vi.   77  .  .  417 

i.   32  .  .  479 

iv.  105  .  .+230 

vi.  112-31  .  511 

i.   45  .  .ti73 

iv.  112  .  .^127 

ii.  \^|.  .  260 

vi.  117  .  .  484 

i.   60  .  .  460 

iv.  122  .  .  290 

ii.   60  ..  ti6 

vi.  187  .  .  461 

i.   67  ..  411 

476 


INDEX. 


Sc. 

iii. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

•rQrt 

Sc.  Line 
iii.  247  . 

Par. 
•t274 

iii. 

20  . 

.  469 

iii.  120 

.  .  382 

iii. 

202  . 

•  189 

•    51 

iii.  251  . 

.  212 

iii. 

22  . 

•  3i5 

iii.  125 

•  •  254 

iii. 

204  . 

.  I78 

in.  255  . 

•  441 

iii. 

48  . 

.  263 

iii.  138 

.  .t36i 

iii. 

208  . 

•t499 

iii.  262  . 

(287 

iii 

f  218 

iii.  143 

.  .t285 

iii. 

213  . 

•  t223 

•\200 

iii. 

97  • 

•  254 

iii.  144 

•  -t397 
jt242or 

iii. 
iii. 

222  . 
234  • 

•tsi3 
•  333 

iii.  266  . 
iii.  274  . 

.  268 
•   24 

in. 

98  . 

•  447 

1*49 

iii. 

239  • 

•t5i3 

iii.  282  . 

.  46l 

iii. 

100  . 

•  255 

iii.  1  68 

.  .  480 

in. 

245  • 

•  469 

(x) 

(4) 

(7) 

A.  W.  v.  3.  297.     (2)  Folio,  "too  blame."     (3)  i  Hen.  VI.  iii.  3.  10. 
Folio,  "and"  (&)  for  "an."   (5)  Folio,  "tended."    (6)  Hen.  V.  iv.  3.  35-6. 
Macbeth,  iv.  i.  59.      (8)  Jb.  v.  7.  1,  2.      (9)  But  Folio,  "importuned." 

LOVE'S  LABOUR 

LOST. 

ACT  I 

i.  123 

.  .  500 

iii. 

219  . 

.  165 

ii.  365  . 

.  l87 

i. 

43  • 

.  176 

i-  133 

.  in 

iii. 

224  . 

•  344 

ii.  441  . 

.  290 

i. 

65  • 
80  . 

.  422 
.  220 

i.  156 
i.  1  60 

•  •  442 
.  .  460 

iii. 

345  • 
ACT  V 

.  412 

ii.  {463}. 
(,464^ 

•  432 

i. 

86  . 

•   5 

i.  174 

.  .  109 

j_ 

81 

ii.  494  . 

.  184 

i. 

107  . 

•  i77 

i.  177 

•  •  364 

ii. 

152  • 
8 

202 

ii.  522  . 

•   19 

i. 

137  • 

•  492 

ACT 

III. 

ii. 

9  • 

.  281 

ii.  750  . 
ii.  752  . 

•  333 
•  144 

i. 

ACT  II 

2  . 

•  274 

i.  i53 
iii.   66 

•  •  13 

.   .247« 

ii. 

69  . 
190  . 

•  344 
.  467 

ii.  758  . 

•fis 

i- 

18  . 

•  5i 

iii.  108 

•   •  368 

ii. 

213  • 

.  460 

ii.  799  . 

•  434 

'• 

28  . 

.  168 

iii.  118 

.   .  368  . 

ii. 

274  . 

•  430 

ii.  813  . 

.  285 

i. 

42  • 

.  491 

iii.  150 

•   •  145 

ii. 

332  . 

.  487 

ii.  923  • 

.  178 

i- 

45  • 

•  485 

ii. 

349  • 

.  200 

ii.  925  • 

.  90 

'• 

107  . 

2 

'"•  1  -9J 

•  349 

ii. 

355  • 

.419^ 

ii.  '926  . 

.  300 

MACBETH. 

ACT  I 

ii.   10 

186 

ii. 

43  • 

•  275 

ii.   59  . 

•  433 

i. 

i  . 

.to04 

ii.   13 

.  .  171 

ii. 

45  • 

.  506 

ii.   64  . 

•tsoi 

»• 

12  . 

.t466 

ii.   20 

.  •  5" 

ii. 

46  . 

•  323 

iii.   32  . 

.  484 

ii. 

3  • 

•  479 

"•   34 

•  •  477 

ii. 

5i  • 

•  5" 

iii.   45  . 

•  323 

ii. 

5  • 

.  484 

"•   37 

.  .  5" 

ii. 

53  • 

.t46o 

iii.  j53}. 

236 

ii. 

7  • 

•tso6 

ii.   41 

.  .  5" 

ii. 

58  • 

'{511 

iii.   57.. 

.  283 

INDEX. 


477 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

vii.    8  .  .283 

iii.   62  .  .  470 

i.  100  .  .  158 

iii.   84  .  .rjjj 

vii.   23  ..   3 

iii.   64  .  .  492 

i.  103  .  .  485 

iii.   94  .  .fi64 

vii.   25  .  .1283 

iii.   75  •  •  5>3 

i.  105  •  •  468 

Hi.  {;°*}-  •  5" 

vii.   26  .  .ti3° 

iii  (IOI1    513 

i.  107  .  .  162 

iii.  107  .  .  466 

vii.   28  .  .506 
vii.   34  •  •  339 

iii.  109  .  .tsii 

i.  108  .  .t497 
i.  112  .  .ti93 

iii.  109  .  .  251 
iii.  in  .  .  466 

vii.   50  •  •  356 

iii.  {J^i}'  •  529 

i.  118  .  .  473 

iii.  120  .  .  47 

vii.   77  •  •  I2 

iii.  128  .  .  484 

i.  121  .  .  150 

6\.  jt468 

ACT  II. 

iiL  l^o}'  '  5" 

»•  "2  .  {fg° 

Ul>  '1127!.  I  *^ 

i.    5  •  •  212 

, 

5i3 

fio\ 

iii.  143  .  •   i 

'•  I23  '  It2?8 

iii.  129  .  {50 

''   \I2J'   '  ^*3 

iii   146  .   (33^ 

|t68 

iii.  139  .  •  467 
iii.  144  .  .t295 

i.   17  •  -t47° 

'•  •»•  -U 

iv.    4  •  •  39° 
iv.   10  .  .  468 

>•  '3»«  '{378 
i.  139  .  .t497 

iii.  147  .  .1336 
iii.  154  .  .  202 

i.   20  ..  485 
i.   24  ..  473 

iv.   14  .  .  471 
iv.   17  .  .tio7 

(   *^ 

ii.   ii  .  -]i97 
(468 

iv.    3  •  -t343 
iv.    8  .  .  93 

i.  {3°\.  .tsi3 

v.   32  •  -t5i3 

ii.   13  •  •  5i3 
ii.   28  .  .  460 

iv.    9  .  .  294 
"•   »  •  '{,0? 

•'•  *•  •{£ 

i.   36  ..   3 

ACT  III. 
i.   14  ••  I2 

ii.   30  .  .t477 
ii.   32  .  .  284 

iv.  {«}.  .  5,3 

i.   41  ..  5" 

'•   '7  •  (1270 

ii.   33  •  •  453 
ii.   49  .  .  (2) 

V.    20  ..  329 

i.   51  •  •  484 

i   25  .  .(  94 

ii.   51  .  .tso6 

V.    21  ..  244 

i.   57  •  -t4H 

(.102 

iii.    2  .  .  308 

'V.    26  .   .  212 

i.   61  .  .  333 

i.   40  ..  5" 

iii.    4  .  .187 

v.   28  .  .t49i 

ii.    4  •  •  473 

i.   44  .  .{J!J 

iii.    6  .  .  240 

v.   3°  •  -t336 

ii.    7  •  -t283 

I 

iv.    2  .  .  468 

v.   40  ..  477 

ii.   21  .  .  5" 

'•  uer  •  5" 

(12) 

v.   45  .  .t49° 

ii.   24  .  .1283 

i.   49  ••  '385 

iv.  <is>.  •  5*3 

v.   49  .  .  467 

ii.   25  .  .  479 

i.   51  ••  329 

20 

v.   50  ..  t3 
v.   52  .  .  ^20 

ii.   28  .  .  107 
ii.   29  .  .  199 

i.   52  •  •  185 
i.   54  ••  "8 

iv.   34  .  -  ti40 
U4i4 

v.   58  ..  484 

ii.   30  .  .tsoo 

i.   65  ..  460 

iv.   36  •  .{^l 

v.   62  ..  511 

ii.   40  .  ^467 

i.   74  ••  244 

vi.    3  .  .  47i 
vi.   17  .  .t4i9 

ii.   57(pun)  (i) 
ii.   63  .  .tsn 

'•63-  •"* 

iv.   37  •  -t494 
iv.   42  .  .1274 

vi.   19  .  .ti8s 

ii.   73  •  •  357 

i.  89  ..  281 

iv.   57  •  •  3!5 

vi.   30  .  .  492 

iii.    2  .  .  93 

i.   95  ••  374 

iv.   58  .  .  453 

478 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par 

Sc.   Line   Pa 

Sc.  Line   Par 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

iv.   61  .  .  17 

ii.   23  .  .  399 

iii.  •!  541   _  2OO 

iv.   6  .  .  494 

iv.   64  .  .  187 

ii.   27  .  .  282 

iv.    8  .  .  12 

iv.   66  .  .  491 

».  {g}.  .tsi3 

"''  I?I  '  '{414 

iv.   12  .  .  17 

iv.  121  .  .  468 

iii.  173  .  .  131 

iv.   19  .  .  468 

(473 

»•   37  •  -  154 

iii.  177  .  .1477 

f?l 

•\252 

ii.   64  .  .1513 

iii.  184  .  .  94 

v-   \g}-  -t343 

iv.  131  .  .  81 

ii-   70  •  •  357 

(287 

v.   13  ..  107 

iv.  133  .  .{4g 

ii.   73  .  .  498 

in.  185  .  .|2g8 

v.   30  .  .tsia 

iv.  138  .  .  384 

"'   8<-  i^ 

iii.  191  .  .1403 
iii.  194  .  .  329 

v.   31  ..  323 
v-   49  •  •  t24 

iv.  139  .  .  405 

iii.   10  .  .  189 

iii.  210  .  .  200 

vi-    5  •  -t359 

v.    i  .  .  443 
v.   10  .  .1271 

iii.   ii  .  .  252 
iii.   16  .  .  403 

iii.  212  .  .  314 

vi.    7  .  .t364 

v.   21  ..  498 

v.   31  ..  460 

Hi-  {is7}-  -tsxa 

iH-{"|}-  -t5*3 
iii.  222  .  .  279 

vii.    2  .  .{2(53 
vii.    4  .  .f5i3 

vi.    2  .  .  420 

iii.   28  .  .  511 

iii-  235  .  .  447 

vii.   18  .  .  466 

vi.    8  .  .  477 

iii-  {33}-  •  454 

iii.  239  .  .  468 

vii.   22  .  .fso6 

vi.   19  .  .1322 

Hi.   47  .  .  315 

vii.   28  .  .  405 

vi.   21  .  .  460 

iii.   48  .  .  202 

ACT  V. 

viii.    4  .  .  409 

vi.   27  .  .  170 

iii   A    |^325 

viii.    7  .  .419 

vi.   38  .  .  342 

I  37i 

.   12  .  .  45o 

viii.    9  .  .   3 

Vi.    41  .   .f220 

iii.   74  -  •  277 

i.   29  ..  47I 

viii.   13  .  .  200 

vi.   42  .  .  257 

iii.   80  .  .217 

i.   66  ..  266 

viii.   18  .  .  423 

vi.   48  .  .  419 

iii.   82  .  ^283 

i-   74  •  •  252 

viii.   22  .  .  513 

iii.   91  .  .t5i3 

»•    4  •  •  92 

viii.   34  .  .208 

ACT  IV. 

iii.   92  .  .1467 

ii.   20  .  .  tss 

viii.   40  .  .130 

i.    6  .  .  484 

iii-   93  •  •  5" 

ii-   23  .  .  357 

(  127 

i.   20  ..  504 

iii.  106  .  .  287 

iii.    5  -  .496 

viii.   41  .,  j  1270 

»•   59  ••  (3) 

iii.  in  .  .  480 

i».    7  •  -tigi 

(  470 

i.   65  ..  344 

iii.  125  .  .  I48 

iii-   13  -  -t335 

viii.   48  .  .  (5) 

i.   89  .  .1468 

i'i.  133  •  •  428 

iii-   i9  •  •  513 

iii.   64  .  .  405, 

i'i-  137  •  .t463 

iii.   25  .  .  u3 

iii.   65  .  ^329 

'•  145  •  -t343 

iii.  139  .  .t5i3 
iii-  148  .  .  428 

...   (37) 
in.  <4o>.  .1231 

'57; 

iii.   66  .  .tn3 
iii.   72  .  .  286 

i-  153  -  -  497 

iii   152  .  .  15 

iv.    2  .  .1284 

III  {Tj}.  .  8. 

(i)  Compare  Macbeth,  v.  8.  48.                  (  \  v  ,  TTT  • 
(3)  Lear,  iii.  2.  8.        (4)  Ib  {[[  _  54         J2j  f'f*-  m:.  lv-  4-77. 
.  "i.  7.  M.        (5)  Compare  u.  2.  57. 

INDEX. 


479 


MEASURE  FOR  MEASURE. 


ACT  I. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ii.  102  .  .  266 

i.   86  ..  513 

iii.  147  .  .  469 

i.   42  ..  491 

"'  {"9}-  '  5" 

i.   89  ..  495 

iii.  185  ..   5 

i.   52  ..  474 

i.  107  .  .  512 

iv.   21  .  .  315 

i.   54  ..  67 

ii.  115  .  .  340 

i.  121  .  .  375 

iv.   28  .  .290 

i.   56  ..  501 

ii.  116  .  .  ii 

i.  240  .  .  86 

v.    6  .  .  467 

i.   69  ..  290 
ii.    4  .  .  228 

ii.  119  .  .  394 
ii.  156  .  .  500 

ii.   33  •  •  467 
ii.   38  •  .298 

vi.   ,3  •  .{* 

ii.   24  .  .  64 

ii.  159  .  .  486 

ii.   86  .  .  396 

vi.   14  .  .  192 

ii.  129  .  .  494 

ii.  160  .  .  500 

ii.  100  .  .  226 

ii.  163  .  .  419 

ii.  1  80  .  .  468 

ii.  126  .  .  93 

ACT  V. 

ii.  189  .  .  367 

iii.   42  .  .174 

ii.  138  .  .  77 

i.     2  .   .  222 

iii.   21  .  .  87 
>»•   39  •  -{jjjj 

iv.   57  .  .  492 
iv.   74  .  .  5°3 
iv.   80  ..  342 

ii.  165  .  .  244 
ii.  172  .  .  309 

i.   36  .  .|397 

^474 

iii.   49  .  .  17 

iv.  102  .  .  186 

ii.  224  .  .  145 

>•   5°  .  .  369 

iv.    5  .  .  498 
iv.   28  .  .  394 

iv.  104  .  .  500 
iv.  in  .  .  461 

«•{$-}•  •  5<* 

51  '  -1503 

iv.   40  .  .  423 

. 

ACT  IV. 

i-   65  •  •  503 

iv.   70  .  .469 

™-{l]l}   .478 

i.   26  ..  230 

i.   74  ••  "4 

iv.   79  .  .469 

iv.  118  .  .  501 

ii.   78  .  .  401 

i.  131  .  .  461 

iv.  133  .  .  390 

ii.   90  ..  403 

i.  145  •  P.  16 

ACT  II. 

iv.  141  .  .  500 

ii.   92  .  .460 

i.  237  .  .  127 

i.   IS  •  •  394 

iv.  153  .  .  86 

ii.   97  .  .f122 

i.  240  .  .  483 

i.   28  ..  151 

iv.  170  ..   5 

1276 

i.  255  .  .  41 

i.   33  .  .  469 

iv.  171  .  .  361 

ii.  103  .  .  461 

i.  305  .  .  265 

i.  184  .  .  509 

iv.  172  .  .  453 

ii.  in  .  .  278 

i.  314  .  .  480 

ii.    9  .  .  500 

ACT  III. 

ii.  150  .  .  127 

i.  315  .  .  482 

ii.   „.  -{4^8 

i.    i    f177 

ii.  172  .  .  93 

i.  347  .  .  196 

'1469 

ii.  220  .  .  325 

i.  358  .  .  233 

ii.   16  .  .  ii 

i.    5  •  •  501 

iii.   78  .  .  301 

i.  400  .  .  260 

ii.   33  .  .  244 

i.(Fol.)2o.  340 

iii.  130  .  .  508 

i.  408  .  .  498 

ii.   46  .  .  422 

i.   28  ..  484 

iii.  133  .  .  492 

i.  494  .  .  29 

ii.   52  .  .  3" 

i.   32  .  .  501 

iii.  138  .  .  349 

i.  496  .  .  480 

ii.   60  ..  408 

»•   43  ••  357 

iii.  144  •  •  468 

i.  498  .  .  503 

ii.   98  .  .  492 

i.   48  ..  469 

iii.  145  .  .  498 

i.  534  .  .  51 

48o 


INDEX. 


MERCHANT  OF  VENICE. 


ACT  I. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

i.    5  .  {  4°S 

ii.  109  .  .  93 
iii.    4  .  .f27o 

i.   19  ..  218 
i.   42  ..  89 

vi.   52  .  .fi26 
vii.    i  .  .t439 

i.    8  .  .  479 
i.   17  -.  t69 

iii.    7  .  /^ 
i".   12  .  .  (5) 

i.   43  .  .t4o6 
ii.  {23}.  .t356 

vii.   {4}.  .264 

(5) 
vii.   M.  .  501 

1.    22  .   .453 

iii.   22  .  .  (5) 

ii.   45  .  .  165 

i.   26  .  .tn8 

iii.  \  \"  •  I51 

ii.  j92}.  .f23i 

vii.   43  .  .  349 

5   3  *     ^8 

\97) 

vii.   53  •  •  187 

'•   35  ••  3° 
i.   38  •  -tsgs 
i.   50  .  .tsoo 

iii.   63  .  .fi78 

ii.  104  .  .  175 
ii.  108  .  .  460 
ii.  115  .  .  220 

vii.   71  .  .  275 
viii.   25  .  .1368 
viii.   29  .  .474 

i.   54  ..  490 
i.   55  ••  t89 

iii.   65  .  .  295 
iii.   73  .  .  no 

ii.  124  .  .  349 
ii.  161  .  .  226 

viii.   33  .  .+230 
viii   42   l**S9 

i.   69  ..  469 
i.   74  .  .  191 

iii.   85  .  .  220 
iii.   89  .  .1291 

ii.  169  .  .  185 

Vm>   42  '  \  169 
ix.  ('31  1  tSg 

iii.   98  .  .+469 

"'  {19?}'  '  231 

US)   U479 

i.   82  .  i  /  "\ 
i.   93  ..  257 
i.   98  ..  399 

iii.  107  .  .f372 
iii.  no  .  .  169 
iii.  119  .  ^290 

ii.  189  .  .f2i2 
ii.  194  .  .t40i 
iv.    i  .  .  161 

ix.   14  .  .  5n 
ix.   26  .  .  145 

ix.   28  .  .1495 

i.  in  .  .  490 
i.  126  .  .  356 
(  (2) 
i-  143  •    466 

iii.  126  .  .  499 
iii.  137  .  .  249 
iii.  140  .  .t426 

/  220 

4  '  Iti74 

iv.    5  .  ^307 

iv.    6  .  .  343 

ix.   51  .  .fsoi 
ix.   61  .  .  492 

ix.   68  .  .  345 
ix.   90  .  .  451 

43   j  or 

iii.  143  .  .  514 

f   /_\ 

Usoo 

iii.  146  .  .  219 

1V-   I0  '  \tioi 

ix.   91  .  .  76 

i.  144  .  .  430 

iii.  150  .  .  148 

iv.   24  .  .  171 

ACT  III. 

i.  148  .  .  20 

iii.  162  .  .  256 

iv.   40  .  .  315 

i.    2  .  .  76 

i.  150  .  PIIO 

r 

v.   17  .  .ti4o 

i.    8  .  .  173 

i.  154  .  .  356 
i.  160  .  .  (3) 

i.  163  .  .  68« 

iii.  167  .  .  495 
iii.  176  .  .  f3 

V.    22  .   \J. 

v-  37  •  -Hi 

i.   57  .  .1980 
i.  no  .  .  198 
ii.    2  .  .  372 

i.  166  .  .1187 
i.  174  .  .t244 

ACT  II. 
5.    3  •  -t264 

v.   47  .  .1430 
v.   52  ..  319 

ii.   16  .  .  462 
..   fiS-1   (480 
•  W  '(476 

f.  178  .  .  466 
i.  185  .  .ti68 
ii.  37-9  .  .  +  232 

i.    7  •  •  tio 
i.    8  .  .  490 

VI.      2  .   .  ^500 

vi.   23  .  4297 
vi.   24  .  .  43 

«•  -  {<£ 

ii.   21  .  .t2i6 

ii.   66  .  .1140 

i.   9  .  .  291 

vi.   30  .  .f274 

ii.   29  .  .  200 

ii.   75  .  .  319 

i.  {l^}.  .  t89 

vi.   40  .  .  314 

ii.   61  .  .  361 

ii.  loo  .  .  322     i.   16  .  .  198 

vi.   44  .  .  323 

"•   63  '  '{136 

INDEX. 


481 


Sc.     Line      Par. 

Sc.     Line      Par. 

Sc.     Line      Par. 

Sc.     Line      Par. 

"•    {gj.     •  123 

ii.     279  .     .  144 

»•       57  •     -t399 

i.     431  .     .  356 

ii                   (  ^ 

ii.     283  .     .  194 

i.       76  ..  382 

i.     444  .     .460 

ii.     295  .     .  398 

>•       77  ••  344 

i.     445  •     •  (12) 

ii.      96  .     .  381 

ii.     310  .     .  t3o 

i.      90  ..     87 

i.    451  .     .  488 

ii.      97  .     .  294 

ii.     321  .     .  209 

i.     104  .     .  162 

ft  307 

ii.     109  .     .  113 

-U--* 

L(:S}-  w 

15  '     I(i3) 

ii.     in  .     .  512 
ii.     115  .     .t5o6 

ii:.       15  .     .     92 
iii.       25  .     .  354 

(no) 
i.     127  .     .  479 

ACT  V. 

ii.     117  .     .  136 

iii.       30  .     4287 

i.     128  .     .(n) 

i.jl&c.1    .  161 

ii.     120  .     .1323 

iv.         3  .     .  467 

i.     134  .     .  376 

lo 

ii.     124  .     .  466 

iv.       14  .     ."  25 

i.     149  .     .  315 

i.      ii  ..  341 

ii.     127  .     .     46 

iv.       21  .     .  157 

i.     164  .     .1263 

i.      20  ..  510 

ii.  4155}.     .tsoi 

iv.       22  .     .  t93 

i.     166  .    .  414 

i.      25  ..     89 

ii.     163  .     .  127 

iv.      25  .     .  451 

i.     182  .     .  314 

i.      56  ..  159 

ii.     165  .    .  403 
H.    169  .     .  472 

iv.       30  .     .  397 
iv.       40  .     .  348 

i.     224  .     .  233 
i.     242  .     .  180 

i-       77  •    {*§2 
i.      94  .     4276 

iv.       46  .     .     t2 

i.     255  .     .  471 

i.     103  .     .  200 

U«      Ijiyjj'          '          3" 

/•__- 

i.     261  .     .  370 

ii.     178  .     4420 
ii.     180  .     .  343 

iv.       52  .     -J2JJ 
iv.       72  .     .     32 

i.     272  .     .  490 

i.       275    .      .J200 

i.     148  .     .  508 
i.     159  .     .  (12) 

ii.     193  .     .  158 

iv.       75  .     .  283 

i.     283  .     .  266 

i.     166.    {^ 

ii.    205  .    .  341 

v.         3  .     .  200 

i.     298  .     .  492 

i.     169  .     .  472 

ii.     211  .     -ti33 

v.       72  .     .     87 

i.     309  .     .  t93 

i.     175  .     .  462 

ii.     212  .     .t494 

v.       89  ..  172 

i.     312-4     .tsi3 

i.     176  .     .  (12) 

ii.     224  .     .  287 

ACT  IV. 

i-     327  •     •  332 

i.     177  .    4230 

ii.     227  .     .     16 

i.         i  .     .tsoo 

i.     342  .     .     14 

i.     200  .     .  218 

*•&•     -tS-3 
ii.    230  .     .  360 
ii.    233  .     .  t3o 

i.         5  .     .  442 
i.        8  .     .  490 
i.        9  •     .ta8S 

i.     35i  .     .  368 
i.     355  .     .  163 
i.     368  .     .  348 

'•     201  hapst356 
i.     203  .     .  tsi 
/297 

i.       22  ..  134 

i-     379  •     •  455 

"•   1242  '     't4<59 

i-       35  ••  295 

i.     382  .     .ti33 

i.     205  .     .t494 

ii.     251  .     .  494 

i.      47  .     .1244 

i.     387  .     .     59 

i.     272  .     .     38 

ii.     254  .     .  473 

i.      51  .     .  (10) 

i.     389  .     .  244 

i.     297  .     .  171 

ii.     275  .     .  322 

'•  &}•  •  •" 

i.     402  .     .  174 

i.     298  .     .  461 

(i)  Macbeth,  v.  2.  5.          (2)  C.  of  E.  i.  2.  38.          (3)  P.  of  T.  iv.  Prologue,  45. 
(4)  A',  and  y.  ii.  3.  54.                (5)  Coriol.  i.  i.  16.                (6)    A.  V.  L.  u.  j 
M  Folio,  "and."                     (7rt)  Folio,  "puts."                     (8)  M.  Ado,  iii.   9.  M. 
,,  "makes."      (10)  Folio,  "masters."      So  Temftst.  u.  i.  5.       Compare 

*  .  \\  i      .       i    .  ,  '  ~JL-*,-     i»-i-iii  '>       T   \vr\iili  \  <ti^f*n  I-  \vith  Jisr  "  —  R     anrl    F     C*n  rwMff£ 

'•  Who- -c  be  thy  »i<isfres,  man? 
2    :~>tt,f  fin  (ii)  Compare  "invaluable.  (12)  Folio,  "  and. 

(13)  J/.u/v///,  ii.  3.  -J.  (14)  T-  A.  v.  3.  70.  (15)  Folio,  "too  blame." 

I    I 


482 


INDEX. 


MERRY  WIVES  OF  WINDSOR. 


ACT  I 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par.     Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

i.  242  . 

(204 

iv.   97 

J475 
•\48o 

iv. 

57  • 

(28 
1350 

i. 

287  . 

J  64 
'391 

ii.   50  . 

25 

iv.  103 

•  57 

iv. 

87  . 

.  207 

iii. 

i  . 

•  237 

ii.  278  . 

4* 

v.  100 

.  148 

V. 

26  . 

•  38 

iv. 

80  . 

•  175 

ACT  III 

ACT  IV. 

ACT 

V. 

ACT  II. 

i.  113  . 

189 

ii.   80 

•  349 

v. 

72  . 

2 

113  . 

•  299 

iv.   14  . 

284 

iv-    5 

•  194 

V. 

231  . 

•  37 

MIDSUMMER  NIGHT'S  DREAM. 

ACT  I 

i.  182  .  . 

5 

ACT 

II.         i. 

83  - 

•  347 

'• 

4  • 

.  290 

i.  184  . 

83 

/  T\ 

f  (3) 

i- 

39  • 

•  J33 

i.  iS8  . 

237 

i. 

.  466 

91  . 

'1247 

i. 

45  • 

tp-i3 

i.  205  .  . 

425 

(s) 

i. 

92  • 

tp-  13 

i. 

69  . 

.1466 

i.  212  . 

i.    7  . 

.  484 

i. 

95  • 

.f228 

i. 

7i  • 

.  tgo 

i.  225  . 

f365 

i.    9  . 

•tasfi 

i. 

105  . 

•  492 

i. 

/74\ 

\jsf 

.1281 

i.  226  .  . 

21 

i.   14  . 

•t349 

i. 

106  . 

•  478 

i. 

76  . 

.  ti 

i.  229  . 

tn8 

i.   19  . 

.t369 

'• 

112  . 

.  290 

i. 

81  . 

.  2OI 

i.  231  . 

ti78 

i.   21  . 

•t287 

i- 

127  . 

.  462 

i. 

100  . 

•t*95 

i.  232  .  . 

d) 

i.   23  . 

•487 

i- 

138  . 

•  349 

i. 

103  . 

.t27I 

i.  237  .  . 

450 

i.   24  . 

•t329 

i. 

i46  . 

•t4°5 

i. 

104  . 

•ti7o 

i.  245  .  . 

66 

i.   30  . 

Jtl21 

i. 

i49  . 

•  132 

i. 

in  . 

•t275 

i.  251  . 

^356 

^283 

i. 

158  . 

•  H5 

i. 
i. 

117  . 
123  . 

•  30 

«•  u- 

t23<3 

i.   32  . 
i-   34  • 

.  466 

.  224 

i. 

i. 

1  60  . 

161  . 

-tio7 
•  3" 

j 

126  . 

.  421 

ii.   25  .  . 

ti 

i-   35  • 

.1468 

i- 

165  . 

•  43° 

i. 
i. 

141  . 
156  . 

•  490 
.t469 

ii.   27  .  . 

ii.  (73). 
\77/ 

t93 

(2) 

i.  (35-1 
139  J 

i.   42 
i.   48  . 

•  415 
.  506 
.  16 

i. 
i. 
i. 

171  . 

179  . 
192  . 

.ti36 
({242 
U244 
•t295 

i. 

160  . 

tP.i3 

ii.   86  .  . 

104 

i.   56  - 

•  332 

i. 

2OI  . 

.t4o6 

'• 

164  . 

•  156 

ii.   90  . 

i.   58  . 

.  484 

i. 

202  . 

.t466 

'• 

173  • 

•  430 

ii.   95  . 

221 

i.    f.7  . 

.  230 

i. 

22O  . 

.  287 

i. 

{176}' 

•  343 

ii.  104  . 

197 

i.   72  . 

•  3*4 

i. 

227  . 

-t223 

LVDEX. 


483 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  I.ir 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line   Par. 

i. 

232  . 

•t437 

ii. 

18  . 

•  474 

ii. 

35*  •  • 

460 

i. 

189 

.  .  (8) 

i. 

237  . 

.tl22 

ii. 

26  . 

.  217 

ii. 

/358\ 

275 

ii. 

9 

•  •  409 

i. 

244  . 

-t^s6 

,   , 

\359/' 

ii. 

16 

•  -t335 

i. 

240  . 

.  480 

ii. 

1  45)' 

•+233 

ii. 

360  .  . 

169 

ii. 

21 

•  •  (2) 

f  68 

ii. 

45  • 

. 
• 

ii. 

361  .  . 

450 

ii. 

29 

•  •  405 

i- 

253  • 

'\i76 

ii. 

364  .  . 

t228 

ii. 

49  . 

•  511 

'• 

266  . 

.  180 

ii. 

78  . 

-  (2) 

ii. 

374  •  • 

too 

ACT 

V. 

i. 

277  . 

•  369 

ii. 

81  . 

.t466 

ii. 

377  •  • 

t89 

i. 

j 

•t244 

i. 

268  . 

•  3'5 

ii. 

90  . 

.ti68 

ii. 

384  •  • 

45° 

; 

2 

•t307 

ii. 

35  • 

•ti93 

97  • 

•  247 

ii. 

385-  • 

203 

i. 

5 

•t279 

ii. 

36  • 

•t343 

ii. 

99  • 

•  142 

ii. 

386  .  . 

490 

i. 

21 

•  •  378 

ii. 

44  • 

.  t?6 

ii. 

104  . 

.  89 

ii. 

402  .  . 

374 

i. 

27 

.  .  t47 

ii. 

65  - 

^365 

ii. 

119  . 

.  18 

ii. 

437  .  • 

484 

i. 

34 

•  •  431 

ii. 

|73-\ 

•  5°4 

ii. 

122  . 

.  328 

ii. 

439  •  • 

486 

i. 

43 

.  .  179 

ii. 

177  f 

79  • 

.  (4) 

ii. 

123  . 

•|336 

ii. 
ii. 

438  •  • 
442  .  . 

333 
52 

i. 

59 
76 

•  -t477 

ii. 

118  . 

•  470 

ii. 

124  . 

417 

91 

.  •  510 

ii. 

'53  • 

|  (2) 
\tio5 

(169 

ii. 

'53  • 
169. 

•  356 

•  53 

ACT  IV 

:• 

98 
H3 

•  •  399 
.  .  291 

11. 

154  - 

i   \sy 

I  29 

11. 

»  u  . 

31 

i. 

2  .   . 

479 

ii. 

156  - 

.t466 

It 

204  . 

•  465/ 

i. 

21  .   . 

(7) 

'• 

lisoj 

.  .  82 

-fi- 

-Mfi^. 

•+178  / 
'  —  r-s-J 

i. 

40  .   . 

-;-., 

i. 

164 

•  •  49« 

ACT  III. 

225  . 

.  t38 

i. 

48  .   . 

457 

i. 

'71 

•  •  374 

j 

2  . 

.  ti 

ii. 

237  • 

•  492 

i. 

57  •  • 

89 

i. 

195 

.  .  (2) 

^ 

14  . 

.  461 

ii. 

272  . 

•  49<> 

i. 

67  .  . 

284 

i. 

225 

.  .  82 

; 

21  . 

.  tn 

ii. 

279  . 

•t456 

i. 

71  .  . 

tl2 

i. 

227 

•  •  43° 

; 

33  • 

t3 

ii. 

282  . 

•  477 

i. 

72  .  . 

399 

i. 

252 

•  •  409 

i. 

44  . 

1?4 

ii. 

290  . 

•  435 

i. 

74  •  • 

tl27 

i. 

255 

.   .  t24 

i. 

84  . 

•  333 

ii. 

292  . 

•  475 

i. 

IOI  . 

457 

i. 

3i8 

•  •  37 

ii. 

302  . 

•  19 

i. 

109  .  . 

284 

i. 

325 

•  •  273 

i. 

\97  )' 

.  501 

ii. 

314  • 

•ti33 

i. 

128  .  . 

'74 

i. 

379 

.  .  438 

i. 

126  . 

-  348 

ii. 

32I  . 

.1469 

i. 

J33  •  • 

284 

i. 

381 

441 

i80 

ii. 

331  • 

.t2l8 

i. 

*37  •  • 

tl29 

i. 

387 

.  .  284 

1  {'937  ' 

•  174 

ii. 

334  • 

•  52 

I'4'} 

X 

i. 

403 

.  .  226 

ii. 

3  • 

•  (5) 

ii. 

337  . 

•  4°9 

Wr 

(412) 

ii. 

15  • 

ii. 

339  • 

.ti68 

i. 

163  •  • 

486 

i. 

ts 

•  •  342 

CO 

Ilnntlrt,  iii.  2.  177. 

(2)  Fo  io,  " 

and." 

(3)  Folio,  " 

hath." 

(4) 

A.  11'. 

v.  3.  »7. 

(5) 

Hamlet,  iii.  2.  188. 

(6)  Folio,  "comes." 

I  2 


INDEX. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING. 


*  ACT  I 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par.    Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

i-  375  • 

•  14 

iii.   56 

.   .  404 

i.  220  . 

.  187 

i.  126  . 

.  82 

ii.   20  . 

•  404 

iii.   86 

.  I2O 

i.  225  . 

.  191 

>•  303  • 

.  284 

»•   53  • 

•  93 

iv.    9 

.   .  400 

ii.    i  . 

•  295 

i-  3°7  • 

.  90 

»•   57  • 

•  423 

iv.   18 

.   .  400 

ii.   27  . 

•  423 

i-  3"  • 

•  194 

ii.  213  . 

.  62 

v.   44 

.  .  81 

»•   33  • 

.  81 

i.  318  - 

•  297 

iii.   81  . 

•  327 

ii.   63  . 

•  295 

i-  320  . 
ii.    4  . 
ii.   22  . 
iii.   32  . 

•  57 
•  347 
296 

.  122 

iii.   88  ..   3 
iii.  119  .  .  331 

ACT  III. 

ACT 

i.   24 
i.   40 

IV. 

.  212 

•   •  368 

ACT  V 

i.     22  . 

•  379 

iii.   49  . 

I48 

i.    i  . 

'\5°7 

i.   46 

.   .  480 

i.  116  . 

•  193 

i.    4  - 

.  200 

i-   5i 

•   -  378 

i.  212  . 

•  57 

ACT  II 

i.   12  . 

'{480 

i.  144 

.   .  278 

i.  249  . 

.  238 

'•   44  • 
i.  189  . 
i.  208 

I87 
472 

i.   42  . 
i.   60  . 
i.   72  . 

•  349 
.  46 
.  158 

i.  156 
i.  168 

•   fl82 

11  \i86 

•  •  399 
•  •  247 

}  •  364 

i-  253  . 
i.  258  . 
i.  260  . 

•  348 
.  191 
.  284 

i.  261  . 

321 

360 

'•  \8oJ- 

•  193 

i.  196 

•  •  343 
(168 

i-  327  • 
iii.   62  . 

.  166 

7 

i-  272  . 
i-  3"  • 

175 

166 

i-   93  • 
ii.   27  . 

.  118 

i.  211 
i.  ai6 

.  .  in 

iv.   59  . 

•  177 

OTHELLO. 

ACT  I. 

i.  440  . 

-315 

iii.  165 

(369 

i.   70  . 

•  44° 

i.   26  .. 
i.   38 

447 

ii.   18  . 
ii.   52  - 

.  274 

iii.  191 

.  .  460 

i-   83  . 
i.   87  . 

333 
440 

i-   55  •  - 

512 

ii-   53  • 

.{477 

iii.  267 
iii.  269 

-  -  368 

i.  149  . 

(268 
'(301 

5.   99  -  - 
i.  100  .  . 

439 
191 

ii.   71  . 
ii.   72  . 

•  4°5 
•  365 

iii.  283 

•  •  247 

i.  159  . 
i.  260  . 

301 
241 

ii'.  390 

i.  124  .  . 
i.  126  . 

435 
(127 

ii.   93  . 
iii-   55  • 

.  161 
•  67 

iii.  403 

-  -45! 

ii.    3  . 
iii.   49  • 

15 
297 

i.  132  .  . 

\497 
158 

iii.   62  . 

•  35° 

ACT 

II. 

iii.  144  . 

342 

i.  140  .  . 

419 

iii.   74  . 

.  160 
{202 

i-   13 
•  d?) 

•  •  343 

iii.  145  . 

479 

i.  151  •  - 

22 

iii.   91  . 

423 

'•  {8} 

•  •  44° 

iii.  188  . 

295 

i.  158  .  . 

347 

iii.  129  . 

.  2OI 

i.   19 

.  .  368 

iii.  190  . 
iii.  203  . 

349 
404 

i.  172  .  . 
i.  180  .  . 

335 
30 

iii.  140  . 
iii.  147  . 

.  428 
|69 
'1330 

i.   24 

.  .  89 
•  •  243 

iii.  213  . 
iii.  216  . 

163 

163 

INDEX. 


485 


Sc.     Line 

Par. 

Sc.     Line 

Par. 

'     ACT  IV. 

Sc.     Line 

Par. 

iii.     217  .     . 

477 

iii.     211  . 

73 

Sc.     Line       Par. 

ii.     108  . 

295 

iii.     301  .     . 

443 

iii.     212  . 

.  174 

i.       28  .. 

353 

ii-     130  • 

p.  16 

iii.     319  .     . 
iii.     344  •     • 

81 
461 

iii.     238  . 
iii.     265  . 

.     42 
•  295 

;•  ft}- 

5" 

ii.     134  . 
iii.       22  . 

5" 
M4 

i.       43  .. 

247 

iii.     35i  .     • 

440 

iii.     282  . 

J  73 
15J3 

i.       72  .     . 

493 

iii.       32  . 

.    122 

iii.     368  . 

440 

iii.     384  • 

•  299 

i.      80  .. 

460 

ACT  V. 

ACT  III 

iii.     417  . 

iv.          22    . 

.  279 
•     93 

i.       82  .. 
i.     125  .     . 

440 

247 

i.       14  . 
i.      64  . 

.    299 

i.       67  . 
iii     !2H 

"'•  i3'  r 

400 
500 

iv.       25  . 
iv.       44  . 

.  466 
•  483 

i.     188  .     . 

ii.         3  •     . 

24 

211 

i.     in  . 

ii.          4  . 

.    460 

{<% 

iii.       66  . 

29 

iv.     105  . 

•  447 

ii.       ii  . 

349 

ii.       45  . 

•    49« 

iii.     152  . 

444 

iv.     105  . 

.  469 

ii.       13  .     • 

12 

ii.       52  • 

•     59 

iii.     157  • 

251 

iv.     195  . 

•  294 

ii.      99  .     . 

274 

ii.     197  . 

•   3»9 

PERICLES. 

ACT  I. 

ACT  II 

v.       13  .     . 

480 

i.       25  . 

.   172 

iv.       29  . 

•    42 

v.       17  .     . 

350 

I  80 

(  rower  ii  . 

285 

iv.       33  . 

.  264 

„      38  • 

377 

iv.       39  . 

.  264 

ACT  III. 

i.       13  • 

244 

Gower,  8  . 

.  244 

Gower,  14  .     . 

290 

ACT  V 

i.       31  • 

350 

„      25  . 

•  4°4 

„     35  •• 

345 

i.     125  . 

.   187 

i.       41  . 

247 

„      28  . 

•  332 

i.       45  .     . 

128 

i.     170  . 

•   M5 

i        59  • 

(244 
•\46o 

„      36. 

•  332 

ii.       17  •     • 

1  28 

i.     208  . 

•  234 

»»      37  • 

5 

VJJ 

i.     285  . 

•       3 

i.      91  . 
i.       93  • 

•  512 
.  46o 
.  229 

,i      40  • 
i.       31  . 

/20I 

•\46o 

•     24 

ACT  IV. 
Gower,  23 

465 

ii.     251  . 
iii.      38  . 

•  4>9 
.   198 

ii.      92  . 

.  238 

iii.       80  . 

.  179            »•      23  .. 

37 

RICHARD  II. 

ACT  I 

i.       90  . 
i.     104  . 

.  270 
.  269 

I    ,„.{ 

22 

ii.        7  . 

.1264 

•t4°7 

i.       12  . 

•t494 

i.     129  . 

.ti5i 

i.     173  .     . 

f2l8 

ii.       23  . 

20 

i.       20  . 

.  480 

i-     MS  • 

.  162 

5.     iSo  .     . 

522 

ii.       30  . 

i.          22    . 

{f\ 

12 

i.     150  . 
i.     160  . 

•  3*5 

i.     190  . 

529 

ii.       36  . 

.  460 

\. 

A_  -   . 

)          C  1  " 

3" 

i'-       39  • 

.  t27O 

L    162  . 

•  73<* 

\.   85. 

.  290 

i.    171  . 

•  529 

ii.        6  . 

t364 

ii.       40  . 

1+307 
\t3io 

(a)  Lines  18  and  19  are  perhaps  to  be  transposed.  Compare,  however,  IV.  T.  iii.  2.  165 


486 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par. 
ii.   42  .  .  296 

;  Sc.  Line   Par. 
iii.  217  .  .  490 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
i.  102  .  .  444 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
ii.    9  •  •  27 

ii.   44  .  .  480 
"'  (50}'  "t365 

iii.  232  .  .  378 
iii.  233  .  .  191 

i.  106  .  .  156 

=•  {.'I}-  •  •« 

ii.   54  .  .  68a 

iii.  243  .  .  356 
iii.  247  .  .  65 

i-  108  .  .  265 

"'   *•  •&, 

iii.   73  .  .{47| 

iii.  259  .  .  380 

i.  129  ..   5 

"•   18  .  .  492 

iii-    3  •  -397 
iii.    9  .  .447 
iii.   15  .  .  no 

iii.  264  .  .1263 
!  iii-  269  .  .  290 
»>•  279  .  .  505 

i-  134  •  -t434 

i  I141}     fiQ 
'•  \i47J-  '  46S 

i.  148  .  .  482 

ii-   28  .  .t494 
ii-   29  .  .f497 

f   2 

iii.   17  .  .  263 

iii-  283  .  .  49o 

i.  157  .  .  268 

"'   3°"  -\28o 

iii.  286  .  .1252 

i-  158  .  .ti3o 

"•   34  •  .  t69 

(.178 

iii.  301  .  .  t94 

i-  J59  •  -tisi 

"•   4i  •  .  468 

iii.   26  .  .tsi2 

IV.     II  .   .f5I2 

i.  169  .  .1408 

"•   46  .  .  290 

iii.   34  .  .  133 

iv.   12  .  .ti5i 

f  8 

"•   52  .  .  244 

iii.   36  .  .+263 

iv.   22  .  .t367 

U  173  '  "(244 

ii.   „    f  22 

iii.   43  .  .   2 
iii.   66  .  .  447 

iv-   35  -  .tio7 
iv.   42  .  .  20 

1  {F~}  fig 

'(246 
ii-   58  .  .(488 

iii.   76  .  .  124 

iv-   43  •  .tisi 

i-  2ii  .  .1137 

U97 

iii    80    ^4?6 

iv-   49  -  •  348 

i-  218  .  .t4o5 

ii-   59  -  .  343 

U77 

fti 

i-   222  .   .   13 

ii.   61  .  .1511 

iii.   95  .  .  107 

1V-    «  '   '  It2 

i.  232  .  .  329 

»-   75  .  .   3 

iii.  118  .  .  482 

i.  239  .  .  17 

ii-   76  •  .t497 

iii.  123  .  .  512 

ACT  II. 

i-  242  .  .1251 

ii-   80  .  .t243 

iii  fi25^ 

i-    3  •  .  305 

i  I247}     80 

"•   88  .  .  465 

"'  1  129)'' 

i.    9  •  •  199 

(.248  r 

ii-   9°  •  •  512 

iii.  127  .  .  490 
iii.  136  .  .  89 

'•  do}-  •  '60 

i-  247  .  .t497 
i.  248  .  .t463 

»•   91  .  .t497 
»•   95  •  .  356 

(484 
in.  151  .  .1  or 

i-   14  ..  343 
i-   16  .  .  290 

i.  250  .  .fii3 
i.  251  .  .  24 

ii-   97  •  .t5i3 
"•   98  .  .  155 

(490 
iii.  164  .  .f2i8 

i-   18  .  .  n3 
i-   19  .  .  22 

i.  254.  (Fol. 
omits  "noble.") 

ii-  103  .  .  512 
(ioB\ 

iii.  166  .  .  440     i.   27  ..  f28 

i.  258  .  .{466 

ii.  in   .  507 

iii.  175  •  •  460 
Hi-  183  .  .t3i5 

i.   29  ..  2o 
>•   49  .  .  ii 

i.  266  .  .  p.  12 

Ins; 

ii.  ii4  .  .  508 

iii.  196  .  .  490 
iii.  201  .  .  84 

i.   52  ..  146 
i-   79  ••  203 

i.  268  .  .  375 
;  /279) 

'•  ugr  •  469 

ii.  119  JfFol.i 
(Castle 

iii.  205  .  .  f28 

i.   90  ..  24 

i-  289  .  .f36i 

ii.  126  .  .(  I2 

1442 

iii.  208  .  .1466 

».   9i  -.  t94 

>•  291  .  .  3x5 

ii.  128  .  .  244 

iii.  209  .  .490 

i.   94  ••  470 

i.  300  .  .  364 

iii.    5  .  .  333 

iii.  211  .  .t377     i.   99  ..  268 

ii.    i  .  .  51 

i".    7  •  .292 

INDEX. 


Line 

I'.ir. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

10  . 

.  162 

j. 

/4J9  a 

iii. 

89  . 

.  218 

i. 

28  . 

15  • 

.  460 

• 

\  494 

iii. 

08  . 

•  529 

i. 

33  • 

18  . 

.1494 

•• 

16  . 

.  t89 

iii. 

103  . 

i. 

49  • 

20  . 

.  506 

'• 

29  • 

•t497 

iii. 

118  . 

.  89 

i. 

57  • 

31  . 

.  478 

ii. 

2  . 

.  482 

iii. 

120  . 

•t497 

i. 

62  . 

23  . 

ii. 

3  • 

•t497 

iii. 

126  . 

•  451 

i. 

89  . 

24  . 

•  497 

ii. 

4  • 

•  25 

iii. 

I46  . 

.  t24 

i. 

93  • 

25  • 

•  5" 

ii. 

5  • 

•t356 

iii 

168  . 

•  335 

i. 

94  • 

26  . 

•+5I3 

n. 

34  • 

[r-  ) 

p.  12 

iii. 

184  . 

.t468 

i. 

96. 

(•497 

ii. 

?AJ. 

.1460 

iii. 

191  . 

•t356 

29  . 

I  or 

!t5oi 

ii. 

(\p>  i 
64  . 

.  478 

iii. 

192  . 

.  230 

i. 
i. 

104  . 

112  . 

33  • 

4466 

ii. 

so  . 

•t3'9 

iv. 

ii  . 

•t5i3 

i. 

117  . 

55  • 

.  456 

ii. 

"3  • 

.  468 

iv. 

14  . 

.  291 

i. 

I2O  . 

62  . 

•  397- 

ii. 

130  . 

•t4«7 

iv. 

24  . 

•m 

i. 

I23  . 

67  - 

.  506 

ii. 

131  • 

.  t22 

iv. 

28  . 

i. 

I29  . 

80  . 
87  . 

20 
.  292 

ii. 

140  . 
141  . 

•  294 
•t33S 

iv. 

{10- 

.  268 

i. 
i. 

'39  • 
I48  . 

100  . 

•  384 

ii. 

166  . 

•  430 

iv. 

55  • 

•  512 

j 

104  . 

•  49^ 

ii. 

168  . 

•  378 

iv. 

57  • 

.  89 

i. 

171 

105  . 

107  . 

•  497 
.  181 

ii. 

I7S- 

'\5io 

iv. 
iv. 

63  • 
67  . 

.tso6 

i. 
i. 

I78  . 
182  . 

123  . 
124  . 
127  . 

130  . 

138  . 
H5  • 

•  t287 
•  ^469 
.1322 

/338 
•\433 
.  204 
.  310 

ii. 
ii. 

ii. 
iii. 

179  . 
183  . 
185  . 
186  . 

204  . 
9  • 

•  59 
•t35« 
•  134 
•  174 

"it  268 
.  487 

iv. 
iv. 
iv. 
iv. 
iv. 
iv. 

74  • 
77  • 
80  . 
83  - 

102  . 
I04  . 

•  498 
.419* 

•  133 

i. 
i. 

i. 

i. 

I85  . 
2I7  . 
224  . 
237  • 
238  . 
256  . 

160  . 
161  . 

•  159 
.  296 

iii. 

12  . 
17  • 

.  281 
-t244 

ACT  IV 

i. 

264  (c 

270  . 

168  . 

•  497 

iii. 

19  . 
31  • 

•  t5I2 

Sc. 
i. 

Line 

Par. 
.  466 

; 

300  . 
306. 

II  . 

18  . 

•  294 

.  82 

iii. 

32  • 

•  5" 

i. 

17  • 

1390 

i. 

226  . 

iii. 

45  • 

.  272 

i. 

18  . 

4196 

»• 

329  . 

ACT  III 

iii. 

61  . 

•  4H 

i. 

19  . 

•  tsoo 

»• 

334  • 

3  • 

•I.S 

iii. 
iii. 

64  . 
70  . 

•  '57 

i. 

•f21) 

.  281 

(b)  Read  "from  off  a  'nointed  ;"  or,  as  Folio,  "  From  an  anointed.' 
(c)  Folio,  "and  if." 


488 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ACT  V. 

"•   53  -  -  505 

iii.   52  ,.  .  296 

v.   27  ..  284 

ii.   -e  /("it" 

iii.   72  .  .  372 

^i 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

\  om.) 

iii.   88  .  .  387 

)•  -343 

i-   37  .  .  41 

i.   38  -.  285 

ii.   56  .  .  197 
ii.   57  •  •  484 
ii.   59  •  •  368 

iii.   97  •  -  190 

ftsoi 
in.  101  .  <  or 

v.   52  -.  498 
v-   54  ..  164 

i.   44  .  .  225 

..    f6r) 

11   <  -1  >    408 

It497 

V'  54~7  '  '  {268 

i.   46  ..  75 

\7of-  •  498 

iii.  103  .  .1329 

v-   56  ..  425 

i.   47  ••  200 

'i-   75  -  -  155 

iii  113^  ,^°''  U 

v.   6r  .  .  290 

i.   62  .  .f268 

ii.   78  .  .  497 

("and"/ 

v.   62  ..  366 

i.   64  ..  52 

ii.   97  •  -t494 

iii.  137  •  .{j£| 

v-   64  .  .|2i8 

i.   77  ..  291 

ii-   99  -  -  53 

i.   80  ..  473 

ii.  101  .  .1512 

iv    2   ft244 

i.   88  ..  478 

ii.  115  .  .  122 

1  498 

V'  (69/1  'tjoi 

i.   90  ..  82 

iii-    4  •  -ti9o 

iv.    8  .  .  257 

v-   69  ..  254 

i.   91  .  .t470 

iii.    5  -  -  144 

v-    3  •  •  151 

v.   70  .  .t4o6 

i.   94  •  •  t93 

iii.   10  .  .  272 

v-    5  •  529  n. 

v.   76  ..  297 

ii.  (I2|.  .t285 

iii.   17  .  .  473 

v-    8  .  .  f69 

v.   83  ..  275 

ii.   18  .  .  80 

iii.   21  .  .  498 
iii.   27  .  .  356 

v-   17  ..  465 
v-   18.  .t243 

vi.    6  .  .  494 
vi.   26  .  .  46o 

11.   48  .  .t4o6 

iii.   50  .  .f349 

v-   25  -  .  406 

vi.   27  .  .  I33 
vi-   40  .  .  246 

RICHARD  III. 

ACT  I. 

ii.    i  .  .t3Q7 
ii.    3  -  -  (i) 

"•  154  •  -t236 
"•  155  -  .  490 

''•  235  .  .  466 
ii-  236  .  .  490 

i.   16  .  .  467 
i.   «  .  .  397 
i.   58  ..  151 

ii-   23  .  .  490 
ii-   26  .  p.  449 
"•   27  .  .  225 

''•  163  .  .t283 

»•  245  .  .  479 
i'-  250  .  .  3o5 
"•  255  •  .  ti 

i-   67  .  .  488 

ii-   31  •  -  69 

"•  l66  •  •  428 

'•   75  •  -t494 

»•   52  •  .  451 

»•  170  .  .  284 

"'  259  '  '{ill 

i.   82  .  .f287 

ii-   56  .  .  492 

»•  *79  -  .  92 

ii.  262  .  .  I59 

»•   84  ..  456 

ii.   67  .  .  474 

ii-  |^3j  .  500 

i''i-    i  •  -t468 

i.   92  ..  480 

ii.  j6®}.  .t233 

11-   211  .   -t34Q 

iii    f"Hve-\ 

i-   94  ••  498 
>•  103  .  .  456 
'•  106  .  .  490 

ii-   71  •  .ti23 
ii-   76  .  .  466 

'i-  215  .  .f468 
»-  216  .  .  342 
ii-  217  .   (Irt) 

iii-    6  .  .  I74 

i-   137  •   •  200 

"•  {pi/-  -tsoo 

ii.  226  .  .  512 

11468 

'•  157  •  .1270 

ii.  »7  .  .  443 

''•  232  .  .  356 

iii-   36{FoK6°r 

INDEX. 


489 


Sc 

Line 

Tar. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par.  1  Sc 

Line 

I'..!'. 

iii. 

63  • 

.  168 

iv. 

25  • 

.  203 

iv. 

J2S7) 

ii. 

92  . 

.t467 

iii. 

65-8  . 

-  376 

iv. 

27  . 

•  375 

1258/' 

ii. 

95  • 

•  151 

iii. 

82  . 

•<3«) 

iv. 

3°  . 

-t29S 

iv. 

2  2}  ' 

•  234 

ii. 

"3  • 

•  (9) 

i  i  i  . 

88  . 

•  "59 

iv. 

37  • 

.  69 

iv. 

288  . 

•  494 

ii. 

120  . 

•t297 

iii. 

90  . 

.  406 

iv. 

45  • 

.  264 

ii. 

«3  • 

.  469 

•  ;• 

J  t93 

t 

ii. 

127  . 

•t497 

in. 

"3  • 

iti78 

iv. 

46  . 

\t267 

ACT  II 

ii. 

129  . 

•  367 

iii. 

127  . 

.  161 

iv. 

58  . 

.  297 

di\ 

ii. 

J33  - 

.  490 

iii. 
iii. 

142  . 
'53-4- 

2 

•  275 

iv. 

iv. 

59  • 
64  . 

.  460 

.  463 

i. 

•4 

(24) 

•  133 

ii. 

144  . 

KIO) 

U79 

in. 

159  - 

.ti64 

iv. 

65  - 

•  497 

i. 

27  • 

•  442 

iii. 

3  - 

•  tsoo 

iii. 

162  . 

.378 

iv. 

70  . 

.tl2I 

i. 

33  • 

•  "5 

iii. 

4  • 

.  94 

iii. 

201  . 

.t468 

I78\ 

i. 

37  • 

.  95    iii. 

8  . 

•ti37 

iii. 

202  . 

.  148 

IV. 

\8of- 

.  153 

i. 

43  . 

.  293    "'• 

16  . 

•t477 

iii. 

206'. 

.  460  ' 

iv. 

95  • 

•  319 

i. 

5°  • 

.  171 

iii. 

17  • 

.tl29 

iii. 

212  . 

•  243 

iv. 

97  • 

•t4°5 

i. 

|55\ 
1  c6l 

•tS«3 

iii. 

29  . 

.  105 

(2Q-4 

t  -  —  -1 

15°J 

iii. 

35  • 

•  333 

iii. 

214  . 

(385 

''•• 

\i5o/- 

•  (7) 

i. 

57  - 

.  (8) 

iii. 

39  • 

.  29 

iii. 

216  . 

.  240 

iv. 

122  . 

•  3.30 

>• 

59  - 

.+223 

iii. 

4i  • 

.  69 

iii. 

222  . 

f  69 

iv. 

134  • 

-t335 

i. 

83  - 

•  275 

iii. 

42  . 

•  49° 

iii. 
iii. 

246. 

|266-\ 

\267  r 

\328 
•t349 

iv. 
iv. 

I46  . 
152  • 

.  148 
.t329 

i. 
i. 

90  . 
116  . 
119  . 

•  474 
-t454 

.t28l 

iv. 
iv. 

iv. 

i  . 

14  • 
18  . 

•  492 
.  62 
.  92 

iii. 

282  . 

•  (5) 

l»7*r 

.  232 

i. 

129  . 

•  372 

iv. 

22  . 

•  295 

iii. 

287  . 

.  122 

iv. 

186  . 

-ti57 

i. 

134  - 

•  512 

iv. 

34  . 

-t37i 

291  . 

22 

iv. 
iv. 

187  . 
205  . 

.  468 

.t2I9 

L 

137- 

'{471 

iv. 

M- 

w 

•  513 

111. 

292  . 

•  355 

iv. 

206  . 

.  232 

ii. 

7  • 

.  287 

iv. 

46  . 

•  307 

iii. 

304  • 

(6)  23 

iv. 

209  . 

.  462 

ii. 

I3('F 

°1-,|73 

iv. 

48  . 

•  75 

iii. 

3°5  • 

•  494 

i  \ 

I 

J 

IJ, 

-  ^ 

iii. 

3»4  • 

.  186 

iv. 

2l8\va 

ii. 

14  . 

•  479 

iv. 

V£ 

ir.'}482 

iii. 

323  • 

•  505 

/  Fc 

,  ^ 

ii. 

24  - 

•  497 

iv. 

71  • 

•  297 

iii. 

325  - 

.  24 

IV. 

2I9('yo 

^236 

ii. 

27  . 

.  326 

;;!; 

328  . 
347  • 

-  438 
•  49«> 

iv. 
iv. 

241  . 
246. 

.  287 
.  290 

ii. 
ii. 

34  • 
42  • 

•  356 
•t47° 

ACT  III. 

iii. 
iii. 

348  - 
354  • 

•  295 
.t364 

iv. 

ii. 

47  • 
49  • 

.t275 
•  438 

i. 

14- 

•  174 

(T?- 

1  \ 

. 

IO  . 

•  243 

iv. 

5  • 

-  85 

iv. 

2^°Wa 

ii. 

\68r 

.t365 

i. 

12  . 

.t267 

iv. 

9  • 

•  297 

iv. 

251  • 

•  »94 

ii. 

76  . 

.  118 

i- 

26  . 

•  243 

iv. 

\I9J' 

•ta59 

iv. 

254  - 

.t284 

ii. 

77  - 

.  404 

i. 

3*  • 

•  t467 

490 


INDEX 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line 

i. 

37  • 

.  469 

ii. 

84  . 

•  331 

vi. 

"5  • 

•  243 

vii.  233  . 

15 

i. 

/39l 
(4°J 

/  490 

ii. 

"5  • 

-  243 

vii. 

3  • 

•  (is) 

vii.  235  . 

•t243 

i. 

44  • 

2 

n. 

117  . 

fl2-j) 

•  97 

vii. 

||l  . 

.  490 

vii.  240  . 

.(16) 

i. 

63  - 

/(ii) 
(297 

ii. 

II23I 
\I24f 

•  233 

vii. 

9  • 

•+494 

ACT  IV. 

L 

64  . 
68  . 

.  21 

•  409 

iii. 
iv. 
iv. 

23  • 
I  . 

29  • 

p.  16 

.  56 
.  178 

vii. 
vii. 
vii. 

20  . 
25  • 
26 

.t468 
.  487 
t88 

>•    3  - 

i.    4  • 

.  150 
.  180 

*• 

7i  • 

•t494 

iv. 

36  . 

t40I 

'•    7  • 

.  466 

'• 

{& 

•490 

iv. 

40  . 

.  109 

vii. 

30  • 
50  . 

•  492 
•  467 

'•   43  • 
i.   60  . 

•  ti58 

i. 

81  . 

.  252 

iv. 
iv. 

41  • 

5°  • 

.   tl 

.  397 

vii. 

If}' 

•  234 

i.   70  . 

.t267 

*• 

110  \ 

P'  4^8 

iv. 

Si  • 

•  297 

vii. 

57  • 

•  343 

i.   76  . 

•t225 

. 

114  . 

|47<> 

iv. 

62  . 

.  200 

vii. 

58  - 

•  487 

i.   94  . 

.  468 

i. 

119  . 

'\497 

.  201 

iv. 
iv. 

91  . 

IOO  . 

.  490 

vii. 

(FoLl 

7°\var./5°5 

»-  1|; 

•t5i3 

i. 

126  . 

(1319 

1  69 

iv. 

106  . 

•t473 

vii. 

81  . 

.f20I 

ii.    5  . 

.  81 

i. 

135  - 

.  485 

V. 

7  • 

.  t89 

vii. 

89  . 

•  4*4 

ii   '"I 

r 

v. 

. 

vii. 

112  . 

•  439 

\I2  j  * 

5  J 

i. 

144  . 

(217 

(398 

vii. 

"3  • 

•t494 

ii.   27  . 

•  92 

i. 

146  . 

.  419 

V. 

25  • 

Is 

vii. 

I2O  . 

•  423 

ii-   35  • 

.(17) 

'• 

fi46) 
\i47J- 

•  tsoo 

V. 

28  . 

.  229 

vii. 
vii. 

I27  . 

•  342 
.t468 

ii.   36  . 
ii-   55  • 

•  494 
.  217 

i. 
i. 

148  . 

157  • 

.  487 

V. 
V. 
V. 

29  • 
32  . 
33  • 

.(14) 

.   t2 

vii. 

.%• 

150  . 

.  382 
.  361 

ii-   59  • 
ii.   71  . 
ii.   81  . 

.  204 
.  512 

.411 

i. 

158  . 
164  . 

•  497 
.  419 

V. 

35  • 

.   29 
/   . 

vii. 

155  • 

•   3 

.  236 

i. 

169  . 

.tl27 

V. 

47  • 

'  " 

vii. 

157  - 

(tag? 

ii.   98  . 

•t477 

i. 

177  . 

.  235 

'297 

vii. 

159  • 

•  5i 

ii.  103  . 

•  37 

i. 

191  . 

•t497 

V. 

55  • 

.  412 

vii. 

161  . 

.  109 

ii.  104  . 

•  470 

i. 
ii. 

198  . 
10,  Fol 

.  467 
.  var. 

V. 
V. 

56  . 

.  411 
.  107 

vii. 

16  J  (Fol-> 
I65\'thereis' 

ii.  120  . 

.  466 
(  497 

ii. 

•t349 

V. 

67  . 

•  97 

vii. 

175  • 

tp.  12 

ii.  124  . 

<  or 

((18) 

ii. 

26  . 

.  281 

V. 

69  . 

.  166 

vii. 

176  . 

•  474 

iii.    8  . 

.  164 

ii. 

53  • 

•  357 

V. 

76  . 

•t494 

vii. 

179  • 

•  342 

iii.   20  . 

•  J93 

ii. 

55  - 

•  92 

V. 

IOI  . 

.  492 

vii. 

184  . 

.  t87 

iii.   27  . 

-(19) 

rR 

V. 

109  . 

.  460 

vii. 

197  . 

.ti96 

Hi-   31  . 

5°  • 

.  159 

vi. 

5  • 

•  356 

vii. 

210  . 

.  no 

iii.   53  • 

•t494 

ii. 

63  . 

.  t76 

vi. 

7  • 

.ti4o 

vii. 

227  . 

.  469 

In) 

ii. 

67  .  p 

•  449    vi. 

9  • 

•  494 

vii. 

229  . 

.t466 

iv-  U- 

•  419 

INDEX. 


491 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par.    Sc. 

Line 

Par.    Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

••  5i5 

iv. 

235  . 

•ti33 

iv. 

483  . 

•  492 

iii. 

130  . 

.  484 

VIOJ 

iv. 

240  . 

•  439 

iv. 

490  . 

.  202 

iii. 

i35  • 

.  291 

iv. 

23  • 

.  159 

iv. 

249  . 

.  196 

iv. 

492  . 

.  232 

iii. 

|i43l 

06 

iv. 

28  . 

•  49« 

iv. 

250  . 

•tl33 

iv. 

501  . 

.  491 

\148J' 

•  50 

iv. 

34  • 

.  118 

iv. 

254  - 

•  372 

iv. 

504  • 

.  ti? 

iii. 

156  . 

./45i 

iv. 
iv. 

53  • 
65  • 

.  t89 
.  240 

iv. 

{a£\. 
\26oj- 

iv. 

508  . 

•469 

iii. 

185  . 

.  460 

iv. 

75  • 

•  509 

\\  . 

263  . 

•  477 

iv. 

5i5  • 

•\20I 

iii. 

201  . 

•  3'5 

iv. 

77  • 

.(20) 

iv. 

268  . 

.  247 

iv. 

539  • 

•  311 

iii. 

202  . 

.  287 

iv. 

86  . 

•  24 

iv. 

269  . 

•  t99 

v. 

7  • 

.  466 

iii. 

209  .' 

•  5" 

iv. 

92  . 

.  300 

iv. 

274  . 

•  t494 

v. 

10  . 

.  469 

iii. 

2IO  . 

•  303 

iv. 

(»}. 

.  148 

iv. 

289  . 

•  353 

v. 

*4  • 

.  492 

iii. 

224  . 

.  201 

iv. 
iv. 

iv. 
iv. 

\I04| 

118  . 

122  . 
135  • 
141  . 
142  . 
I76  . 

.'  202 

•  443 
•  45i 
.t287 

.(21) 

•  439 

iv. 
iv. 
iv. 
iv. 
iv. 
iv. 

292  . 

304  . 

326  . 

331  . 

337  • 
338  . 

•  315 
•  34' 
•  t494 
.  49» 
.t»3Q 
•t329 

v. 

ii. 

18  . 

ACT  V 
5  • 

21  . 
19  . 

•  3" 

•  474 
•  479 

.tl22 

iii. 
iii. 

iii. 
iii. 

227  . 
230  . 
239  • 
243  • 

245  . 
267  . 
9oT 

•  159 

•  taiy 
.498 
.  118 
.  4^8 
•  4i4 

iv. 

180  . 

.  201 

iv. 

(3531 
\354/' 

•t336 

iii. 

47  • 

.  140 

111. 
iii. 

201  . 

292  . 

•  5X4 
•  474 

iv. 

I83  . 

.1466 

iv. 

354  • 

•  i77 

iii. 

48  . 

•tS«3 

iii. 

298  . 

•  505 

IV. 

188  . 

•  365 

iv. 

358  . 

•t470 

iii. 

Si  • 

•  i59 

iv. 

ii  . 

.t299 

iv. 

189  . 

.  490 

)369-l 

iii. 

S2  . 

•  494 

v. 

3  • 

•  342 

iv. 

199  . 

•  17 

IV. 

U7«  j 

.taa8 

iii. 

68  . 

.  469 

v. 

9  • 

•  507 

iv. 

209  . 

•ti33 

iv. 

385  . 

.t266 

iii 

/72l 

•   5*2 

v. 

460 

iv. 

217  . 

•  375 

iv. 

4*7  • 

.   t2 

i/yj 

1I4J  ' 

.  4*jy 

iv. 
iv. 

221  . 
229  . 

.1287 
.  69 

iv. 
iv. 

426  . 
428  . 

.1349 

•  474 

iii. 

82  . 

95  • 
Clio) 

.  88 

.  378 

v. 

V. 

21  . 
36  • 

•  337 
.p.  12 

iv. 

{£}• 

.t37<> 

iv. 

458  . 

.t5*3 

iii. 

»3h 

l«9) 

•  423 

(t) 

Hamlet,  i.  2.  92. 

da) 

A.  y.  L.  iii. 

T  18. 

(2)  Cvml 

.  iv.  4. 

132. 

(3)  "  Majesty  "  when  a  dissyllable  will  henceforth  not  be  noticed. 
(30)  Hamlet,  iii.  4.  98.         (4)  Folio,  "Ay,  madam."  (5)  Macbeth,  v.  8.48. 

(6)  Folio,  "an  end."  (7)  Compare  Hamlet,  v.  i.  1-285.  (8)  J.  C.  i.  2.  317. 
(9)  M.  of  V.  v.  i.  77.  (10)  Folio  omits  "weighty."  (ii)  Folio,  "  thiaks't." 
(12)  Folio,  "and."  (13)  Folio,  " worshipfully."  (14)  Lear,  iv.  i.  i>4. 

(15)  Folio  omits  "and."     (16)  Folio,  "  King  Richard."    (17)  Rich.  III.  i.  i.  158. 
(18)  Folio  omits  "  deep."    (19)  Folio  omits  "  my  lord."    (20)  Macbeth,  iii.  2.  49. 
21)  A.  IV.  v.  3.  297.  (22)  y.  C.  i.  3.  22. 


492 


INDEX. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET. 


ACT  I. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par.      ACT  IV. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

v.  107  .  . 

39  * 

i.  128  .  . 

3 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

i. 

48  .  . 

335 

v.  133  •  • 

411 

i.  158  .  . 

200 

i.   16  . 

i; 

in  .  . 

119  .  . 

24 
264 

ACT  II. 

ii.  117  .  . 

447 

i.   60  .. 
iii.   20  . 

457'* 
51  ~ 

i. 

140  .  . 

275 

i.   93  .  . 

204 

ii.  141  .  ;• 

!._e 
4°5 

v.   36. 

480 

ii. 

14  .  . 

"9 

ii.   42  .  . 

460 

iii.   17  .  . 

22 

v-   59  • 

474 

/3I5 

ii.   76  .  . 

120 

iii. 

9  •  • 

iii.    7  .  . 

429 

iii.   19  . 

474 

ACT  V. 

iii. 

17  .  . 

497 

iii.   91  .  . 

28l 

iii.   38  .  . 

264 

i.   40  . 

178 

iii. 

98  . 

440 

iv.  194  .  . 

I46 

iii.   49  .  . 

492 

iii.   52  . 

400 

iv. 

19  .  . 

440 

vi.    9  .  . 

475 

iii.   98  .  . 

492 

iii.  143  . 

356 

iv. 

61  .  . 

4*7 

vi.   21  . 

492 

v.   18  .  . 

133 

iii.  211  . 

490 

iv. 

94  • 

479 

v.   84  .. 

236 

iii.  214  . 

333 

iv. 

99  • 

173 

ACT  III 

v.  136  . 

264 

iii.  246  . 

469 

iv. 

109  .  . 

291 

i.   66  .. 

41  ga 

v-  153  •  • 

292 

iii.  247  . 

"4 

v. 

70  . 

354 

1.   122  . 

198 

V.   2OO  .   . 

13 

iii.  275  . 

.  465 

TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW. 

ACT  I. 

i.   50  • 

.   10 

i-  (Fol.)355 

22 

ii.   14  . 

.  460 

Induction. 

i.   74  • 

•  507 

i-  357  • 

247 

»•   73  • 

•  465 

i.   78  • 

•  351 

i.  366  . 

22 

iii.   36  . 

•  24 

i. 

68  . 

.  109 

i.   89  . 

i 

i.  369  • 

22 

iii.  189  . 

.   21 

i- 

84  . 

.  132 

i.   90. 

•  5°7 

i-  377  • 

489 

J36i 

\' 

87  • 
96  . 

.  472 
.  76 

i.  131  • 
i.  150  . 

•  324 
.  166 

ACT  III 

iv.    2  . 

.  482 

i. 

105  . 

.  461 

i.  174  . 

•  465 

i.    9  . 

P.  I4 

iv.   12  . 

.  301 

i. 

no  . 

•  369 

i.  251  . 

.  368 

i.  105  . 

28 

iv.   20  . 

.  461 

i. 

119  . 

419^ 

i.  252  . 

•  297 

ii.    i  . 

.  46l 

iv.  {|j}. 

•  5°5 

ii. 

13  • 

.  291 

ii.   27  . 

•  356 

ii. 

25  • 

•   9 

ii.    8  . 

.  220 

ii.  108  . 

.  297 

iv.   46  • 

•  505 

ii. 

84  . 
107  . 

.  176 
•  455 

ii.   12  . 
ii.   45  . 

•  43° 
.  461 
(201 

ii.  156  . 
ii.  186  . 

•   7 

•  465 

v.    7  . 
v.   26  . 

•  3° 
.  482 

ii. 

136  . 

•  370 

ii.  190  . 

ii.  236  . 

.  224 

ii.  248  . 

.  297 

ACT  V. 

ACT  I 

ACT  II. 

ACT  IV 

ii.   66  . 

•  504 

i 

3  . 

•  295 

i.   15  • 

.  126 

i.   71  . 

•  175 

ii.   72  . 

•  »74 

i 

14  . 

.  510 

i.   18  . 

.  492 

i.   77  . 

.  460 

ii.   93  . 

•  485 

i 

32  . 

•  342 

i.  158  . 

•  477 

i.  125  . 

.  482 

ii.  144  . 

.  281 

i 

48  . 

•  507 

i.  259  . 

•  505 

ii.    2  . 

.  I2O 

ii.  175  . 

•  497 

INDEX. 


493 


TEMPEST. 


ACT  I. 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par.    Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

ii. 

109  . 

•  494 

ii. 

220  . 

.  460 

Par. 

ii. 

no  . 

•  458 

ii. 

222  . 

ii. 

{389}' 

.  462 

•  447 

ii. 

in  . 

•  494 

ii. 

226  . 

•  78 

ii. 

39°  . 

•  27 

ii. 

118  . 

•t3I2 

/  274 

ii. 

407  . 

•  (4) 

•  '3 

231  . 

ii. 

119  . 

•  124 

IH93 

ii. 

414  . 

.  120 

(335 
"I  90 

1*99 

ii. 

232  . 

.ti49 

ii. 

419  . 

•  456 

.  176 

U95 

n. 

235  • 

•  5" 

ii. 

424  • 

.t285 

ii. 

127  . 

•  454 

ii. 

243  • 

.  291 

ii. 

435  • 

•t466 

•  456 

ii. 
ii. 

137  • 
138  . 

.  270 
|  (2) 

ii. 
ii. 

244  . 
248  . 

.  220 
•  456 

ii. 
ii. 

439  • 
442  . 

.  hi 
•  232 

.1131 

1*4  7 

ii. 

249  • 

.ti36 

ii. 

446 

•  457 

•{•2 

ii. 
ii. 

ii. 

141  . 
142  . 
144  . 

•  454 

•  457 
•   5 

ii. 

ii. 

255  • 

<257\ 

.  220 

•  343 

ii. 
ii. 

f447\ 
<448f' 

•  387 

.   12 

•  342 
.  183 

ii. 

148  . 

'{% 

ii. 
ii. 

264  . 
297  . 

•t494 
tp.i3 

ii. 

452  • 

•  485 

•  77 

ii. 

157  • 

.  462 

ii. 

298  . 

ii. 

453  • 

f  200 

U3^9 

|48o 

ii. 

{ill}' 

•  513 

ii. 

/3oi\ 
1302)' 

.  456 

ii. 

456  • 

.  182 

•  457 

ii. 
ii. 

165  . 
168  . 

•  494 
.  39 

ii. 

327  • 

•  45° 

ii. 
ii. 

457  • 
478  . 

•  335 

•  343 

173  • 

•  471 

ii. 

333  • 

J  473 

.  158 

(188) 

ii. 

338. 

•  47i 

ACT  II. 

.  469 

U89/' 

*  5*3 

ii. 

348  • 

•t494 

•  457 
•  47° 

ii. 

ii. 

193  • 
194  . 

/  Tri/C\ 

.  467 
.  i87 

ii. 
ii. 

352  . 
353  • 

.265 

i. 
i. 

i  . 

5  • 
6  . 

.  401 
•  (5) 
•t494 

•  497 

ii. 

201. 

•  457 

ii. 

357  • 

•  471 

i. 

28  . 

.  208 

.1283 

\204) 

ii. 

361  . 

•  159 

i. 

75  • 

.  189 

.  482 

•  472 

ii. 

U99/' 

•  330 

ii. 

362  . 

{1263 
480 

i. 

.  200 

•  294 
.ti78 

ii. 

ii. 

200  . 

206  . 

tp-13 
.  484 

ii. 
ii. 

363  • 
365  • 

.  182 
.  291 

i. 

no  . 

120  . 

•t263 
.  228 

ii. 

209  . 

.  123 

ii. 

366  . 

•  230 

" 

121  . 

•  305 

!t5oi 

ii. 

210  . 

•  494 

ii. 

369  • 

•  (3) 

i. 

126  . 

.  264 

..  62 

ii. 

211  . 

•  341 

ii. 

370  • 

.  487 

i. 

'31  • 

.  400 

I  (i) 

•  497 

ii. 

212  . 

/  24 
•1469 

ii. 

37- 

|t283 

11401 

1 

/'34\ 

ussi' 

•  495 

Jt23i 
t  5" 

ii. 

2T3  • 

{% 

!!! 

379  • 
38o. 

•  342 
.  226 

i. 

150  . 

.  510 
•  471 

494 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par 

i.  151  .  .  490 

Sc.  Line   Par 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

ACT  V. 

i.  160  .  4494 

i.   32  .  4494 

iii.  102  .  .tsoo 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
i-    4  •  •  480 

i.  163  .  .  (6) 

i.   42  .  {.^7 

ACT  IV. 

i-    7  •  .  460 

i.  168  .  4281 

»•   45  -  -  (4) 

i.    4  -  -t274 

i.    9  •  •  484 

i.  181  .  {tr(°} 

»•   57  •  -ti77 

i.    8  .  .  469 

i.   10  ..  432 

i.  185  .  .ti4i 

i.   59  .  .tsoo 

i.   12  .  4513 

i-   15  -  .  208 

i.  202  .  .tsoo 

i.   62  .  .{350 

i.   26  .  .(473 

i-   l6  -  -  333 

i.  207  .  4323 

I478 
>•   72  ••  255 

(490 
i.   27  ..  307 

i.   28  ..  291 

|-    /28-\ 

i.  215  .  ^469 
i.  217  .  .  (8) 

1.   220  .   .  387 

'•  ffl}-  •  5-3 

i.   31  -  -  480 

i.   68  ..  487 

•  \30  /  •  494 

'•  {$}  •  * 

i.  221  .  .  58^ 

ii.   27  .  .  479 

'•  I74r  ^35° 

i-   38  ..  305 

i.  236  .  .  471 

;   (76!    f26o 

i-   42  .  .t467 

"•{.*$•  *• 

ii-  {g|-  -361 
ii.  104  .  .  492 

i.   94  .  ^360 

»•   43  •  •  294 
i-   53  -  -t2i8 

i.  {^J.  _  4?I 

ii.  106  .  .  244 

i.   98  ..  295 

i-   63  ..  497 

i.  284  .  .  470 
i.  287  .  .  322 

ii.  108  .  .  503 
ii.  126  .  .  137 

i.  101  .  .  473 
i.  iro  .  .  484 

L  64'  •(»', 

i.  292  .  .  145 

ii-  147  •  •  330 

i.  123  .  .  422 

i-   68  ..  482 

i.  296  .  .  291 
i.  308  .  .  374 

ii.  149  .  .ti6i 
iii.    2  .  .333 
iii.   26  .  .  501 

i.  124  .  .  484 
i.  140  .  4494 
i.  143  .  .  461 

l'  179/  '  232 
i-   79  •  .  261 

'•  3"  '  {{348 

iii.   40  .  .  487 

i.  145  .  .  439 

i-   97  •  ^467 

i.  317  .  .tsoo 

i.  146  .  .  483 

i.  too  .  .  376 

(      \ 

i.  103  .  .ti^i 

i.  321  .  .  17 

47  1 

i.  r49i  .  ,„ 

f  ol 

iii.  -f5^ 

\i53J 

i-  in  .  .  466 

H.   {$.   .261 

iii.   56  .  .  240 

i.  154  .  .  260 

i-  "3  •  ^305 

ii.   15  .  .  96 
ii.  121  .  .  (7) 

iii-   59  •  •  278 
iii.   60  .  .  16 

i.  155  .  .  442 
i.  168  .  .  360 

i.  114  .  .  347 
i-  117  .  .  (7) 

ii.  137  .  ^401 
ii.  152  .  .  456 

iii.   62  .  .  264 
iii   63 

i.  170  .  .  484 
i.  186  .  .  417 

i-  "9  •  •  469 
i-  I'30'}   2,2 

ii.  164  .  .  457 
ACT  III. 

iii.   64  .  .  t69 
iii.   65  .  .  467 

i.  188  .  .  457 
i.  204  .  .  484 
i.  217  .  .  209 

(132  /  '  232 
i-  135  •  .t467 
'•  139  •  •  230 

5.    i  .  (t244 
1  300 

i'i-  {s7}-  •  342 
iii.   80  .  .  247 

i.  231  .  .t356 

i-  259  .   369 

'•  MS  •  •  497 
i.  146  .  .  425 

i-    4  •  •  506 

iii.   81  .  .  404 

i.  262.  .{t83 

i.  149  -  -  364 

i.    6  .  .  265 

iii.   92  .  .  410 

90 

i.  -|  g?>.  .  266 

i.   15  ..  (9) 

iii.   93  •  •  238 

•'•  #>  -fe 

i.  214  .  .  t7o 

INDEX. 


495 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

i. 

215  • 

.t2l8 

i. 

235  • 

•  494 

i. 

270  . 

.  279 

i. 

3i5  • 

t279 

i. 

216  . 

.1335 

i. 

249  . 

(271 

i. 

289  . 

.  276 

j 

(Epil.  3 

}48o 

i. 

220  . 

.  168 

\  I2 

i. 

3°3  • 

-t3°5 

1  J3  • 

1 

38 

i- 

250  . 

•  295 

i. 

31°  . 

.  296 

i. 

18  . 

200 

'• 

nay 

tp-  13 

i. 

268  . 

.  460 

(i)  Folio,  "  th' outward."  (2)  "Impertinent." — Lear,  iv.  6.  178. 

(2«)  J.  C.  iv.  3.  280.   (3)  "  Old."— Macbeth,  ii.  3.  2.     (4)  "  Owes."— A.  W.  v.  iii.  97. 
(5)  "Masters." — M.  of  V.  iv.  i.  51.     "  Mastres  "  is  written  for  "  mistress"  in  B. 
and  F.  Coxcomb,  ii.  3.  (6)  "Against  course  and  kind." 

(7)  Folio,  Munday,  "and."  (8)  See  Tempest,  i.  2.  200. 

(9)  Theobald,  "busy  less."  (10)  Folio,  "lies." 


TIMON  OF  ATHENS. 


ACT  II. 


ACT 

.f\<_i    11. 

ACT  IV 

iii.  \*°5~ 

1  jV4 

}    •  36i 

i.       3°  •     • 

65 

* 

i.      44  . 

.      22 

i.       36  .- 

5" 

iii.     398 

•     •  325 

i.       63  . 

•    512 

i.     123  .     . 

343 

>•       33  •• 

492 

iii.     400 

•     •  43i 

i.     107  . 

-    385 

ii.         7  .     . 

392 

i.      46  .. 

355 

iii.     463 

.     .  400 

i.     139  . 

.       28 

ii.       12  .     . 

200 

ii.       13  •     • 

419* 

iii.     530 

.       .    212 

i.     206  . 

.    241 

ii.       28  .     . 

484 

ii.       16  .     . 

468 

i-     257  . 
i.     284  . 

.    487 
•    338 

ii.     119  .     . 

407 

"•      33  •     • 

ii-       35  -     - 

350 
252 

ACT 

V. 

ii.     in  . 

•  4°5 

ACT  III 

iii.     131  .     . 

361 

'•       31 

•     P-  *4 

ii.     151  . 

•  479 

i.     167  .     . 

1  86 

iii.     180  .     . 

171 

i.       61 

.     .  466 

ii.     154  . 

.  510 

ii.       39  .     . 

400 

iii.     232  .     . 

172 

i.       202 

•     •  487 

ii.     184  . 

.  480 

iii.      23  .     . 

400 

iii.     277  .     . 

213 

iii.         6 

ii.     251   . 

•     57 

v.       56  •- 

477 

iii.     287  .     . 

187 

TITUS  ANDRONICUS. 

ACT 

I.                      i.     231  .     . 

492 

ACT  II. 

iii.     305 

200 

i.       ii   . 

.  301 

i.     235  .     . 

479 

iv.       1  8 

.       .    229 

i.       20  . 

•  465 

i.     288  .     . 

480 

i.      69  .. 

103 

i.       32  . 

./423 

i.     301  .     . 

MS 

iii.       75  .     . 
iii.       92  .     . 

492 
463 

ACT 

III. 

i.     147  . 

.  186 

i.     325  .     . 

12 

iii.     102  .     . 

322 

i.      38 

.       .    264 

i.     189  . 

•  253 

i.     347  •     • 

477 

iii.     160  .     . 

490 

i.       5* 

•       •    423 

i.     190  . 

•  479 

i.     368  .     . 

'95 

iii.     285  .     . 

431            i.       66 

.       .    484 

496 


INDEX. 


Sc.     Line      Par. 
i.     151  •     •  417 

ACT  IV. 
Sc.     Line      Par. 

Sc.     Line      Par. 
Hi-       35  •     •  478 

Sc.     Line      Par. 

1.        102    .       .     143 

i.     269  .     .  191 

i.       29  ..  47o 

iii.      58  .    .  484 

ii-       13  •     .  484 

"•         4  •     •  344 

i-       95  ••  508 

iii.      65  .     .  492 

ii.       16  .     .  507 

.ii.        9  •     -264 

ii.     101  .     .  472 

iv.       10  .     .  105 

H.       50  .     .  456 

ii.       44  •     •     69 

ii.     136  .     .  485 

iv.       16  .     .     77 

iii.         i  .     .465 

»•       53  •     .  337 
ii.       76  .     .  483 
ii-       83  .     .  295 

ii.     162  .     .  485 
ii.     176  .     .  247 
iii.       20  .     .  301 

ACT  V. 
i.       40  .     .  462 
i.      46  ..  484 

iii.       99  .     .  302 
iii.     156  .     .  480 

TROILUS  AND  CRESSIDA. 

ACT  I. 

ACT  II. 

iii.       34  ••       3 

v-       93  ••  337 

i.        7  .     .  187 

ii.       64  .     .  294 

iii.     ui  .     .  500 

v.     105  .     .  433 

i.       21  ..     90 

ii.     HI  .     .  491 

iii.     120  .     .  264 

v.     170  .     .  336 

ii.     139  .     .  104 

ii.     179  •     •  285 

iii.     127  .     .  500 

v.     176  .     .  217 

ii.     185  .     .     81 
ii.     189  .     .  104 
ii.     312  .     .  372 

ii.     205  .     .419^: 
ii.     266  .     .  165 

ii.     272.     .(478 
\507 

iii.     142  .     .  496 
iii.     150  .     .  480 

v.     195  •     •     69 
v.     255  .     .  217 
v.     272  .     .     91 

ii.     314  .     .  224 

iii.       13  .     .  430 

iii.     159  •     •  295 

v.     292  .     .  395 

iii.         7  •     -481 

iii.       25  .     .  2ii 

iii.     161  .     .     90 

iii.       Si  .      1  95 
•\377 

iii.       45  .     .  202 

iii.     162  .     .  401 

ACT  V. 

iii.       68  .     .  472 

Hi.     115  .     .     51 

iii.     188  .     .   129 

iii.       71  •     •  368 

ui.  ,„.  .{4-; 

iii.     190  .     .   174 
iii.     198  ..       3 

i.      21  ..  151 
i-      30  ..  356 

iii.       89  .     .     12 
iii.       96  .     .  490 
iii.     101  .     .  343 

i'i-     135  •     •  333 
Hi.     149  .     .  162 
Hi-     252  .     .  211 

Hi.     200  .     .  487 
iii.     201  .     .  274 

i.      63  .     .  407 
i-      7*  •:•'••  356 

i-     I03  •     •  255 

iii.     105  .     .  490 

ACT  III. 

m-     247  •     .{'jj 

ii.     109  .     .     13 

iii.     114  .     .  322 

. 

iii.     125  .     .  342 

i.       71  ••  368 

ACT  IV. 

11.     144  •     •  428 

i.     151  .     .     37 

iii.       13  •     •  482 

iii.     188  .     .  342 
iii.     199  .     .  490 

iii-         3  •     -495 
iii.        8  .     .458 

iv.         4  .     .  290 
iv-       47  .     .  492 

iii.       53  -     •     9» 
vi.       20  .     .  422 

in.     288  .     .  295 

iii.       20  .     .  490 

iv.       59  •     •  382 

vi.       21  .     .     ii 

iii-     339  •     •  188 
iii.     346  .     .479     ; 

".       27  .     ./  9° 
1*74 

iv.     136  .     .  244 

V.           12    ..       25 

vii-         5  •     .440 
ix.         i  .     .  474 

INDEX. 


497 


TWELFTH  NIGHT. 

ACT  I. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

v.    3  •  -t3°7 

i.  j.<32   »}(2) 

iv.  102  .  .  218 

Sc.  Line   Par. 
i.   10  ..  284 

v.   69  .  .  13 

ii    3     180 

iv.  no  .  .1244 

v.   84  .  .  93 

v.    i  .  .  35 

i.   15  •  •  18 
i.   16  .  .t349 
i.   23  ..  62 
i.   24  ..  312 
i.   27  ..  144 

v.  108  .  ^244 
v.  120  .  .  343 
v.  124  .  .  254 
v.  156  .  .  400 
v.  158  .  .ti2i 

ii.    6  .  .  356 
ii.   8  .  .  323 
ii.   19  ..  368 
ii.   21  .  .  297 
ii.   27  .  .  230 

v.    5  .  .ti45 
v.   23.  .  (3) 

ACT  III. 

i.   32  .  .  477 
i.   33  ••  277 
(4°3 

V.   159  .   .  202 

v.  171  .  .t368 

ii.   30  ..   2 
ii.   33  .  .  299 

i  te}-  •  -« 

i-   44  •  •  33* 

i.   38  .  •]  or 

(  95 

u    M    t«1 

u.  ^J.  .tS»3 

v.  196  .  .1244 

V.   201  .   .  158 

v.  224  .  .1420 
v.  259  .  .  224 
v.  265  .  .  ti 

ii.   35  .  .290 
ii.   37  .  .168 
ii.   42  .  .  462 
iii.   34  .  .  165 
iii.  89"natural  "(a) 

i.   45  .  -tn8 
i.  109  .  .  84 
L  114  .  .fi49 
i.  120  .  .  349 
i.  121  .  .  480 

'*•    3I  '   '1^.77 

v.  269  .  .  4H 

iii.   95  .  .  122 

i.  123  .  .  303 

ii.  |*9}.  .t5i3 

v.  274  .  .  505 
v.  280  .  .  (i) 

iii.  107  .  .  103 

Hi.  {3-}.  tor. 

i.  128  .  .1312 

I  133  .  .  66 

ii.   33  •  •  J7 

v.  282  .  .  343 

iii.  122  .  .  401 

L  i33L  Fo1*  „ 

«.   35  •  .{£ 

V'   ^  '   {t22° 

iii.  143  .  .  346 

i.  146  .  .t5i3 

ii.   43  •  -290 

V.   295  .   .tl2I 

iii.  149  .  .  295 
iii.  185  .  .  107 

L  149  .  .  5" 

ii.   48  •  •  287 

V>  {297}'   't513 

iii.  187  .  .4190 

i.  166  .  |fjy 

ii.   53  •  •  4*4 

v.  305  .  .  218 

iii.  199  .  .  349 

i.  172  .  .  118 

iii.    i  .  .  24 
iii.    5  .  .182 

v.  315  •  -t479 

iv.   23  .  .  447 

ii.    9  •  •  X37 

iii.  30  (Glossary) 
iii.  112  .  .t32i 

v.  3*7  •  •  349 
v.  321  .  .  396 

iv.   26  .  .  145 
iv.  {29|  .tSi3 

ii.   48  •  •  233 

v.  322  .  .  194 

f  38 

ii.   57  •  -4»9« 

"i.  "3  •  -{32? 

v.  324  .  .  287 

iv-  42  .  y; 

ii.   72  .  .t3i9 

iv.    6  .  .t284 

v.  L329  „}  290 

iv.   50  .  .  484 

iii.   13  •  ^469 

iv.   13  .  .  127 
iv.   16  .  .  490 

ACT  II. 

iv.   80  .  .  227 
iv.   89  .  .1244 

(  supply 
iii.  1  5,  thanks. 
(  How." 

{200 

iv.   90  .  »T5O5 

343 

i    i   ft3x6 

iii.   1  8  .  .359 
iv.   91  .  .T497 

iv.   27  .  .  200 

"  \t4o6 

fi.     Q           HI-       2®   "      *        ' 

iy.   28  .  !t49,0 

i.   20  .  .  81 

iV"    94  '   If469 

iii.   29  .  .  84 

5.    22  ..   21 

iv.   96  ..  335 

40  •  •  404 

iv-  {40}'  4I9" 

i.   27  ..  244 

iv.   99  .  .281    iii.   42  •  •  ^93 

A  pun. 


INDEX. 


Sc.  Line   Par. 

ACT  IV. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

iii.   46  .  .  155 

Sc.  Line   Par. 

i.   73  .  .t2i9 

i.  231  .  .  479 

iv.    2  .  .  175 

i.   57  .P-  12  (4) 

i.   79  .  .t468 

i-  235  .  .  77 

iv.   85  .  .ti4i 

i.   61  .  .  353 

i.   81  .  .  442 

i.  237  .  .  169 

iv.  196  .  .   2 

i-   63  ..  (5) 

i.   86  ..   i 

i.  238  .  .  423 

iv.  201  .  .  149 

i.   65  ..  136 

i-   89  .  .t379 

i.  245  .  .  200 

iv  239   |^243 

ii.   10  .  .  200 

i.   92  ..  434 

i.  253  .  .  490 

iv.  248  .  .  187 

ii.   37  .  .t3i9 

i-  {*}.  .tsi3 

i.  256  .  .  349 
i.  266  .  .  343 

iv.  255  .  .1196 

"•   73  '  |t37o 

i.  104  .  .  128 

i.  272  .  .  no 

iv.  |*H.  .  419 

ii.   86  .  .  275 

j  Jn3\   _ 

i.  278  .  tp.  12 

iv.  262  .  .  53 
iv.  278  .  .  280 

ii.   88  .  .  319 
ii.   92  .  .  34 
ii.  loo  .  290  (6) 

i.  117  .  .  473 
i.  125  .  .  285 

i.  289  '  •{$ 
i.  293  .  .t4oo 

iv.  Cqif-  •  28° 
iv.  323  -  .  276 

«•  {;::(•  •  •* 

i.  127  .  .  92 
i.  130  .  .  243 

i.  324  .  .t376 
i.  327  •  •  16 

*•{£}•  ••« 

iii.    6  .  p.  12 
iii.   17  .  .t494 

»•  J35  •  •  397 
i.  141  .  .  93 

i.  340  .  .  158 
i.  346  .  .  350 

iv.  366  .  .  193 

iii.   21  ..   3 

i.  143  .  .  303 

iv.  380  ..   5 

iii.   28  .  .  506 

i-  H4  •  •  343 

i.  357  •  •  4O1 
i.  358  .  .t278 

iv.  381  .  .  512 
iv.  383  •  -t494 

iii.   29  .  .  137 
iii.   30  .  .  202 

i.  150  .  tp.  12 
i.  160  .  .  443 

i  /36ol  (Glos- 
(371)  sary) 

iv.  384  .  .  287 

iv.  (392)   f 
1393/'  >T5  3 
iv.  410  .  .t368 

ACT  V. 

i.     22  .   /  356 
\t22I 

i.  174  •  •  86 
i.  198  .  .  25 
i.  201  .  .  400 

i.   222  .   .  411 

i-  375  •  •  287 
i.  368  .  .  244 
i-  391  .  tp.  12 

iv-  415  •  .  349 

i.   37  .  .t28i 

i.  224  .  .  492 

i-  393  •  •  478 

iv.  418  .  .  64 

i-   58  ..   3 

i.  228  .  .  469 

1-  398  '  '{296 

(i)  See  K.  J.  iii.  4.  81.             (2)  See  Macbeth,  \.  5.  30 
(3)  See  below,  line  35  ;  A.  Y.  L.  ii.  7.  31.            (4)  A.  Y.  L.  iii  i  17 
(5)  7.  C.  iii.  i.  207-8.        (6)  K.  7.  v.  2.  79.      (7)  K  7  v  5  7 

TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA. 

ACT  I. 

i.   40  ..  501 

iii.   84  .  .  477 

i   .'47-1 

i.   57  ••  187 

iii.   88  .  .  338 

(69  j  '  23Z 

i.   25  ..  231 

i.   59  ••  89 

ACT  II. 

iii.    6  .  .299 

i.   28  ..  231 

i.  ^  61  .  .  231 

iii.   62  .  .  503 

i.   30  .  .  501 

••  ^33-  1 

'•  \i7/-  '  232 

iv-   65  •  •  457 

i.   34  •  •  403 

"'  \37  J  '  5°° 

i.    3  •  •  80 

iv-   72  .  .  335 

i-   39  •  •  501 

ii.   62  .  .  447 

i-   35  ••  197 

iv.   87  .  .  467 

Compare  "I  have  fairly  forgotten  it." 


INDEX. 


499 


Sc. 

Line 

Par.   Sc. 

Line   Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par.    Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

iv. 

{£}• 

187 

i. 
i. 

64 
84 

•  .  494 
.  .  189 

ii. 

45  • 
92  • 

.  166 
.  510 

iv. 
iv. 

184  . 

200  . 

•  467 
.   3 

iv. 

183  . 

460 

i. 

162 

.  .  28 

ii. 

109  . 

.  368 

ACT  V 

iv. 

2IO  . 

477 

i. 

258 

•  •  455 

ii. 

118  . 

.  490 

ii. 

38. 

•  174 

V. 

120  . 

231 

ii. 

19 

•  •  94 

iii. 

8  . 

•  451 

ii. 

51  • 

.  469 

vi. 

38  - 

263 

ii. 

26 

.  .  223 

iii. 

41  . 

•  438 

ii. 

84  . 

.  285 

\ii. 

2  . 

492 

iv. 

9  • 

.  220 

ii. 

178  . 

.  215 

rii. 

5  • 

290 

ACT 

IV. 

iv. 

48  . 

.  232 

iv. 

3  • 

•  463 

i. 

10 

•  •  425 

iv. 

67  . 

24 

iv. 

15  • 

•  244 

ACT  III 

i. 

18 

•  .  295 

iv. 

70  . 

.  279 

iv. 

93  • 

.  461 

i. 

23  • 

20 

i. 

21 

.   .   21 

iv. 

89  . 

.  482 

iv. 

109  . 

•  354 

i. 

59  • 

405  .   i. 

64 

.  .  490    iv. 

170  . 

.   24 

iv. 

152  . 

.  196 

WINTER'S  TALE. 

ACT  I. 

ii. 

372 

•  .  457 

i. 

165  . 

.  249 

ii. 

169  . 

.  508 

i. 

20  . 

.  465 

ii. 

391 

.  .  499 

i. 

195  . 

•  295 

ii. 

177  . 

.  484 

i. 

26  . 

.  278 

ii. 

392 

.  .  271 

ii. 

49  . 

•  175 

ii. 

180  . 

ii 

f  13 

ii. 

402 

•  .369 

ii. 

57  • 

•  356 

ii. 

187  . 

•  '73 

i. 

27  . 

<    ** 

•\222 

ii. 

4I2 

.   .  220 

.. 

M 

•  457 

ii. 

202  . 

•  473 

; 

29  • 

•  334 

ii. 

420 

•  •  457 

163  1 

ii. 

2I7  . 

•  354 

ii. 

13  • 

•  425 

ii. 

425 

•  •  457 

iii. 

i4  . 

.  484 

ii. 

232  . 

.  480 

ii. 

22  . 

•  499 

ii. 

427 

.  .  152 

iii. 

20  . 

.  412 

iii. 

46  . 

.  212 

ii. 

44  . 

•  255 

ii. 

432 

•  •  457 

iii. 

35  • 

.   12 

iii. 

69  . 

.  I78 

ii. 

70  . 

•  505 

ii. 

437 

.   .  200 

iii. 

104  . 

.  265 

iii. 

116  . 

.  212 

ii. 

112  . 

•  5°3 

ii. 

449 

•  •  457 

iii. 

"5  • 

.  260 

iii. 

121  . 

•  356 

ii. 
ii. 

117  . 
135  • 

.  499 
.  368 

ii. 
ii. 

455 
461 

.  .  265 
•  •  457 

BL 

138  . 
142  . 

•  348 
.  297 

ACT  IV. 

ii. 

I'5')- 
\I52j 

.  228 

ACT 

II. 

iii. 

iii. 

150  . 
174  . 

.  499 
-  369 

i. 
i. 

2  . 

26  . 

•  247 

/349 

ii. 

154  • 

263  . 

•  297 
.  279 

i. 

20 

.  .  465 

ACT  III. 

iii. 

65  . 

.419*1 

ii. 

266  . 

.  228 

/2OI 

ii. 

47  • 

.  469 

iv. 

66  . 

•  274 

ii. 

290  . 

.  484 

i. 

94 

H433 

ii. 

87  - 

.  499 

iv. 

76. 

•  477 

ii. 

318  . 

.  269 
(484 

i. 

99 
105 

.  -  356 
.  .  128 

!!' 

IOI  . 

104  . 

.  228 
.  460 

iv. 

1*. 

{64 
M387 

ii. 

329  . 

i. 

128 

.  .  270 

/228 

iv. 

142  . 

•  509 

ii. 

352  . 

.  86 

i. 

133 

•  •  394 

ii. 

109  . 

•\468 

iv. 

168  . 

•  399 

ii. 

356  . 

•  357     »• 

162 

•  •  385 

ii. 

166  . 

•  378 

iv. 

169  . 

.  128 

K 

K  2 

500 


INDEX. 


Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

Sc. 

Line 

Par. 

ACT  V. 

Sc.  Line 

Par. 

iv. 

176  . 

fl2 

*  188 

iv. 

522  . 

.  202 

i.  141  . 

.  121 

iv. 

203  . 
264  . 

l°° 

p.  14 

•  24 

iv. 

532  . 

J309 
1499 

Sc.  Line 
i.   13  •  • 

Par. 

i93 

i.  161  . 
i.  170  . 

.  380 
.  290 

1  QO 

iv. 

539  • 

.  270 

i.   18  .  . 

356 

i.  219  . 

•  132 

iv. 

352  . 

•{£ 

iv. 

543  • 

•  372 

i.   19  -. 

!3 

i.  230  . 

•  377 

iv. 

375  • 

.  501 

iv. 

549  • 

•  43i 

i.   23  .. 

244 

ii.   60  . 

.  265 

iv. 

378  . 

.  244 

iv. 

550  . 

.  188 

i.   42  .. 

354 

ii.   66  . 

•  X93 

iv. 

428  . 

•  49° 

iv. 

581  . 

.  264 

i.   86  .. 

224 

ii.   94  . 

•  415 

iv. 

440  . 

.  198 

iv. 

73i  • 

.  90 

i.   87  .. 

490 

»•  155  • 

•  335 

iv. 
iv. 

442  . 
466. 

.  478 
•  394 

iv. 

783  • 

/278 

'\335 

i.   95  •• 
i.  109  .  . 

469 
274 

iii.   25  . 
iii.   53  . 

.  469 
.  508 

/29° 

iv. 

795  • 

•  324 

i.  112  .  . 

469 

iii.   65  . 

•  447 

501  . 

"(333 

iv. 

831  . 

.  105 

i.  123  .  . 

166 

iii.   68  . 

.  no 

iv. 

5"  • 

•  49° 

iv. 

822  . 

•  447 

i.  138  .  . 

249 

iii.  100  . 

.  192 

i  V. 

512  . 

•  244    iv. 

813  . 

.  460     i.  140  .  . 

143    iii.  144  . 

•  85 

VERBAL     INDEX. 


A-  abbreviated  preposition     . 

adverbial  prefix 
A,  an  (article)      .     .     .     .     . 

omitted  after  "like,"  "as' 
"  what  "  . 


PAR. 

140 
24 


in  archaic  poetry   ....  82 
"A    many    men,"    "an    eight 

days"   . 87 

used  for  "one"      ....  81 

"  Many  a  man  "     ....  85 

transposed 422 

'A  for  "  he  " 402 

Accent,  pause  accent    ....  453 

on  monosyllabic  prepositions  457*1 
on      other      monosyllables, 

especially  "  the"     .     .     .  457 

emphatic  accent,  or  ' '  stress"  453*1 
Elizabethan,  on  some  words 

thrown  forward  ....  490 

thrown  back 492 

variable,  why? 490 

Accents,  five 452 

six  apparently   ....  494-503 
four  apparently      .     .     .  504-510 

emphatic 453« 

Acc'ess 490 

Accuse  (noun) 457 

Active  participles,  confusion  in .  372 

Addict  (participle) 342 

Adjectival  phrases  transposed    .  419** 

Adjectives 1-22 

both  active  and  passive  .     .  3 

combined  together      ...  2 

anomalously  formed   ...  22 

transposed 419 

as  adverbs i 

transposition  of      ....  l4^ 
used  for  nouns 5 


PAR. 

Adverbs,  formation  of  ....  23-5 

transposed     420-21 

adverbial  compounds .     .     .  429 

After  (adv.) rf 

=  "  according  to  ".  141 
Again  =  "  on  the  other  hand  " .       27 

Against,  used  of  time   ....  142 

Alar  H'm 463 

Alexandrines,  very  rare     .     .     .  493 

apparent 495-9 

Alive 140 

All  for  "any" 12 

for  "every" 12 

used  adverbially    ....       28 

"  Without  all  question "      .  418    ( 

All-obeying  =  all-obeyed      .     .  372 

A»-<° {,3 

Almost  ="  mostly,"  "generally"      29 
Alone  =  "  above  all "  .     .     .     .       18 

Along      .     . 30 

Amphibious  section,  the    .     .     .  513 
An,  one,  pronunciation  of     .     .       80 

"Andif"  =  if  indeed.     ...  105 

"And  though" 105 

And  =  "  and  that  too  "...       95 

in  answers 97 

used  for  "  also  "  by  Wickliffe  100 

with  the  subjunctive  .     .     .  102 

=  "even" '  {tos 

=  "if" 101 

Angary          ....    >;    ..  477 
Anon.        EVer  and  anon       .     .      30^ 

Another 88 

Antecedent,  plural  with  singular 

verb 247 

An't  were 104 

Anything,  (adv.) 31 

Archbishop     .          492 

Arose  for     arisen  " 343 

Arrived.     "Arrived our  coast"     198 


502 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


109,  275, 


PAR. 

Arrived.  "I  am  arrived"  .  .  295 
Article.  See  "a,"  "  the." 

indefinite,  transposition  of  .  422 

Artificial,  adj.  active  ....  3 

As 106-13,  108-9 

a  contraction  of  "  al(l)so  "  -* 

=  "as  if"    .... 

=  "namely" 

"So  as"  .     . 

"As  that"    . 

That  as    .... 

"As  then  "... 

=  "which,"  "where 

=  "  for  so"  .     .     . 

=  "though"     .    . 

"when  as" 16 

"as-as" 276 

"  so. ..as,"  omitted  in       .     .  281 

"  that...(«j)  to,"  omitted  in  277 

Asp'ect 490 

At.  "At  friend" 143 

"At  the  first" 91 

"At  first "  =  "  at  the  first "  90 

-Ation,  -ition,  suffix  omitted  .  .  451 

Auth'prize 491 

Auxiliary  verbs 298-331 

Away.  "  I  cannot  away  with  32 

A-weary 24  (3) 

Awful  =  "  awe-struck  "...  3 


Back.  "To  and  back"      ...  33 

Backward  (noun) 77 

Bad  (noun) 5 

Banish.  "  I  banish  you  the  land"  198 

Bar.  "  I  bar  you  your  rights  "  .  198 

Barn  (verb) 200 

Barrels     ! *g 

Barren J§ 

Be  (verb),  how  used     .     .     .  298-300 

Be-,  prefix 438 


Because  =  "in  order  that  "  .     . 

"for  because" 

Be-en,  plural  of  "  be  ".     .     . 
Befal.     "  Fair  be/al"   .... 
Behaved.      "Have   I   been  be- 
haved"       

Beholding 

Being  used  like  "  seeing  "     .     . 
Beshrevv.    "  Be  shrew   my    soul 

but" 

Besides  =  "  For  the  rest "    . 


344 
117 

J5i 
332 
297 

295 
372 
378 

126 
34 


Best.  "  I  were  best "...  230,  352 
Bestow.  "  I  bestow  this  of  you"  175 
Better.  "  I  were  better"  .  .  230,  353  ' 
Bin,  plural  of  "  be"  ....  332 
Blame.  " Too  blame"  .  ...  73 
-Ble,  suffix  active  ....  3,  445 
Bloat  =  "  bloated "  ....  342 

BoA&ment 448 

Both 12 

=  only 128 

"But  only" 130 

transposed 129,  420 

with  subjunctive  =  "unless"     120 

for  "  each "       12 

Brain  (verb) 290 

Briefly  =      recently"  ....       35 

But 118-30 

meaning  and  derivation  of  .     118 

transition  of 121 

signifying  prevention      .     .     122 

"  I  doubt  not  but "     .     .     .     122 

"  No  more  but"    ....     127 

But-en,  E.  E.  —  "without"      .     119 

By,  adv 36 


' '  to  come  by  "   . 
prep.  =  "about' 


Call  for  "recal" 

'Came  for  "  became  "  .  .  . 
Can.  "And  they  can  well  on 

horseback" 

Can'onized 

Canstick  =  "  candlestick  "  .  . 
Care.  "  I  care  not  who  know  it" 
Careless  (passive) 

=  "uncared  for"       .     .     . 
Catch'd  and  "  caught "     .     .     . 

-Ce'  final  for  -ce's 

Cease  =  "  cause  to  cease  "   .     . 
Chance.  "  How  chance?  "    . 
Chanced  (partic.  -pass. )     .     .     . 
Chaucer,  varies  in  accentuation 

uses  French  transpositions 
Cheap.       "  Good  cheap"  . 

Chid  (participle) 

Child(<?)ren 

Childing.  ' '  Childhtg  autumn  ". 
Chose  for  "  chosen "  .  .  .  . 

Cide  for  decide 

Climate  =  "live  " 

(verb)   ....... 

Tome.  "  To  come  view  fair  Por- 
tia" .  .  . 


MS 
145 


460 
460 

307 

491 

461 

368 

3 

3 

344 
47i 
291 

37 
295 
490 
419 
198* 
343 
477 
290 
343 
460 
290 
290 

349 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


503 


Command'fjment 488 

Comm'erce 490 

Comp'act  (noun) 490 

Comparative  in  er  after  dentals 

and  liquids 7 

doubled n 

Com'pell'd 492 

Complain.   "  Complain  myself  "     296 

Com'plete 492 

Compound  words     ....    428-35 
phrase  compounds      .     .     .     434 

anomalous 435 

Condition,  expressed  by  parti- 
ciple       377 

Conditional  sentences,  irregular- 
ities of 371 

Confusion  of  constructions    .    409-13 
in  superlatives  .....     409 

with  "  whom  " 410 

Conjunctions  ......    95-137 

"  that"  a  conjunctional  affix     287 
conjunctional  sentences,  el- 
lipses in 383-93 

Construction,  irregularities  of  406-27 

Consult  (noun) 451 

Coutemptible="  contemptuous"        3 
Contract,  for  "  contracted  "  .     .     342 
Contraction  or  slurring  of  sylla- 
bles in  pronunciation  .    462-73 
Couplets,  trimeter    ....      500-3 


D. 


Dare.    "  He  dare"  "  he  (fares"  361 

Dazz(^)led 477 

Dear  (dissyllable) 480 

Declined.     "  I  am  declined"     .  295 

Degenerate  (participle)     .     .     .  342 

Deject  (participle) 342 

for  "  dejected  "       ....  342 
Denied.     "  First  he  denied  you 

had  in  him  no  right"  .     .  406 
Desire.  "  I  desire  you  ^pardon"  174 
Devote  for  "  devoted "     .     .     .  342 
Dialogue  in  verses  of  three  ac- 
cents       500 

Dipthongs  dissyllabled      .      480,  484 

Dis-,  prefix 439 

Disdained  =  disdainful    .     .     .  374 

Dishabited 439 

Disjoint  (participle)      ....  342 

Dislikes.     "  It  dislikes  me" .     .  297 

Oisnatured  439 

Disnoble 439 

Dispose  inoun) 451 

Divine,     adj.    transposed      by 

Chaucer  and  Shakespeare  419 


PAR. 
Do    .     ...     ...     .     •  303-306 

"  Little  is  to  do  .  .  .  359,  405 
"  What's  more  to  do"  .  359,  405 
"  I  (do)  not  know  "...  305 
"  To  do  salutations  "...  303 
omitted  and  inserted  .  .  .  306 
"  Don,"  "  dout "  from  "  do"  .  303 

Door  (dissyllable) 480 

Dreadful  =  "  awe-struck "  .  .  3 
Drove  for  "  driven "  .  .  .  •  342 
Droven  for  "  driven  "  ....  344 


E. 


E  final  pronounced 487 

of  French  origin  pronounced  < 4 

Each  for  "  both  " 12 

for  "  each  other  ".     ...  12 

Easily 467 

Eat  for  "  eaten  " 343 

-Ed  final  for  -ful,  -ing  ....  374 
in  participles  dropped  after 

"t,"  "  te,"  &c 342 

Either  (monosyllable)  ....  466 

Ejaculation,  not  reckoned  in  the 

verse     ....          .     .  512 

Elision    of   "the,"    "to,"    &c. 

before  vowels      ....  462 

Ellipses 382-405 

of  a  verb  of  speech      .     .    .  382 

after  "will"  and  "is"    .     .  405 
in  conjunctional  sentences  383-93 

of  "it" 404 

of  "it  is" 403 

of  "there  is" 403 

of  "is" 403 

of  "  neither"  before  "  nor".  396 
of  nominative    ....  399-402 

of  "one"  before  "other"   .  396 

of  superlative  inflection  .     .  398 

of  a  verb  of  motion     .     .     .  405 

in  Antithetical  sentences     .  395 

in  Relative  sentences      .     .  394 
Emphasis,  different  in  different 

accented  syllables  .     .     .  453** 

prolongs  words 475 

prolongs  monosyllables   479^-486 

En  (third  person  plural  inflection)  332 

prefix 440 

suffix 444 

termination 290 

Endeavour.  "  End  favour  \hyst\f"  296 

England 477 

Enshield  for  "  enshielded  "   .     .  342 

(participle) 342 

Entertain(^)ment 488 


504 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


PAR. 

Folio  writes  "  it  "  for  "  its  "   .     . 

PAR. 

T?R 

-Er,  -el,  and  -le  final  dropped    .     465 
final,  a  dissyllable       .     .     .     478 

misprints  in      
Fool.  "  Why  old  men/w/(verb) 
Foot  (verb)      

338 

2OO 
290 

-Es.      Final  es  dropped  after  ss, 
ce,ge    471 
third    person   plural  inflec- 
tion if  pres.  indie.    .     .     .     333 
Escaped.     "  Was  escaped  "  .     .     295 

For..     "For  all  this"   .     .     .     . 
=  "  as  regards  "   .     .     .     . 
=  "  because  "  
=  "because  of     .... 
"for  because  "  

154 
I49 
IS* 
ISO 
151 

after  dentals  and  liquids  .     473 
-Eth  (third  person  plural  inflec- 
tion)           334 

=  "  instead  of  "    . 
"  For  that"  
=  "  to  prevent  "    .     . 

148 
287 
'54 

"  But  even  now  "    ....       38 

For-,  prefix      .          
"  For  to  "    

441 

Every    12 
Every,  one,  other,  neither  (plu- 
ral nouns)  12 
Evil  (monosyllable1)  466 

Force  (verb)    
Foreign  idioms    
Forgot  (participle)   

290 
4l8 

343 

Eye  =  "  appear  "    293 
Except,  excepted     118 
Ex'ile     490 

forgotten  yourself" 
Forth,  without  verb  of  motion    . 
—  "  from  "    

295 
$ 

Expect  (noun)     451 
Expire  (verb  transitive)     .     .     .     291 

French,  transposition  of  adjec- 
tives   

Exterior/y  428 
Extra  syllable  before  a  pause     .     454 
two  pause-extra  syllables    .    458 

Fretten  
Frighten      
From.     "  From  out"  .     .     .     . 
without  verb  of  motion    .     . 
Froze  for  "  frozen  "  
-Ful,  suffix  active  and  passive   . 
Furnace  (verb)    

344 
344 

3 

343 
3 
290 

F. 
Fair.  "Fair  befal"  297 

Future  for  subjunctive  .... 

3? 

Fairies  speak  in  verses  of  four 
accents  504 
Fall  (verb  transitive)     ....     291 
False  (verb)    290 

G. 

Gave  for  "  misgave  "    .     .     .     . 

460 

Fame  (verb)    290 
Famous'd  (participle)   ....     294 
Far  =  "very"    40 
for  "farther"   278 

Glad  (noun)    
Go.     "Go    along"    =  "come 
along  "  
=  "walk"inWickliffe  .     . 

5 
30 

io3- 

Fault  (verb)    290 
Fear  (dissyllable)     480 

Good.      "Good  my  lord".     .     . 
"  goodnovt  "  

13 

"fear    me    not"  =  "fear 
not  for  me  "    200 

"good  cheap"    

198*- 

(Verb  act  )                                   201 

Fell.     "Thou  hast  fell"  ...     344 
Felt  (adjective)    22 
Fiddlier  477 
Flourish  463 
Folio    reads   "and"   for   "an" 
(see  Index  to  Plays)    .     .     101 
has  the  3rd  pers.  pi.  indie, 
prcs.  in  -s  .                         .     -\\i 

Guiled.     "Gniled  shore"      .     . 

H. 

Handling    
Hannen'd  (oartir.  nass.1    . 

294 
477 

VERBAL  IXDEX. 


505 


Happily  =  "  haply "    .     .     .     . 

Happy  (verb) 

Hardy  =  "bold" 

Have.  "Should  have"      .     .     . 

"to  have"     omitted    after 

"  would  have "   .     .     .     . 

"Thought  to  have  begged" 

Hear.   "  Who  heard  me  to  deny 

it?" 

Heat  (participle) 

le  for  "him        ....      206, 

"man" 

Hence,  without  verb  of  motion  . 


Henry    VIII.    not  written  by 
Shakespeare  ..... 
Her,  antecedent  of  relative   . 
for  "herself"   ..... 


Here.     "  Thy  Aere-a.pproa.ch  "  . 
Hers,  used  for  "her"  adj.     .     . 
Him,  dative    ....... 

for  "he"     ...... 

"  himself"  ..... 

=  "he  whom"  ..... 

Hinder.  "  Wh0>shall  hinder  me 
to  weep  1  "      ..... 

His,  antecedent  of  a  relative      . 
for  "its"  ....... 

'"s"    ....... 

Hither,  without  verb  of  motion  . 
monosyllable     ..... 

Hitherto,  used  of  space     .     .     . 
Hoist  (participle)      ..... 

Hoi  p  for  "hoi  pen"  ..... 

Homag^r  .     .          ..... 

Home.    "  Speak  him  home". 
Honest  (verb)      ...... 

Hour  (dissyllable)    ..... 

How.     "How  chance?"  .     .     . 

for  "  however,"  for  "as"  . 

However  (it  be)   ...          .     . 

Hybrid  compounds  ..... 


PAR. 
42 
290 
148 
327 

411 
360 

349 
342 
207 
224 
4i 
477 

iff 

223 
229 
217 

41 

220 
208 
223 
246 

349 

21 
228 
217 


342 

343 

443 

45 


I  for  "me" 209 

unaccented  dropped  .  .  .  461 
"  (I)  beseech  you"  .  .  456,  401 
slurred  in  "  min/ster,"  &c.  .  467 

If.     "//"that" 287 


PAR. 
Ignomy ....          ....     478 

Impersonal  verbs 297 

Importless 44^ 

-In  for  "-un,"  prefix     ....     442 

In.     "He  fell  i«  love"     ...     159 

=  "  in  the  case  of"   .     .     .     162 

"/«  round" 163 

=  during  :  "in  night"  .     .     161 
with  the  verbal,  "in  sleep- 
ing"  164 

Indicative 346-348 

Simple  Present  for  Complete  346 
Simple  Past  for  Complete 

Present 347 

Present,ThirdPers.Pl.in-/«     333 

in  -es}  th 335,  336 

Past  in  u 339 

Second  Per.  Sing,  in  -is      .     340 

Future  for  Subjunctive  .     .     348 

"  And  thou  lowest  me  "  .     .     363 

Infect  (participle)    ....  155,  342 

Infinitive 349-360 

active  for  passive  ....  359 
indefinitely  used  ....  356 
perfect,  "He  thought  to  have 

done  it " 36° 

used  as  a  noun 355 

"To"  omitted;  inserted     .     349 
,,        omitted  and  inserted 

after  the  same  verb     .     350 
„      with   noun,    used   as 

subject  or  object  .     354 

Inflections 332-345 

-Ing,  termination 372 

confused  with  the  old  inflec- 
tion "en" 93,  371 

Inhabited  =  "  housed  "...     294 

In's  for  "in  his" 461 

Interjectional  lines  .....     512 
Interrogative  Pronouns,   transi- 
tion from  to  Relative     251,  252 
Into,  with  verbs  of  rest     .     .     .     159 

accent  of 457* 

Inward  (noun) 77 

Irregularities  of  construction    406-27 

Is,  ellipses  after 405 

ellipse  of 403 

-Ised  final  in  polysyllables    .     .     491 

It 226-29 

ellipse  of 404 

for  "its" 228 

"  it  is,"  ellipse  of  ....     166 

"To  voice  //  with  claims"  .     226 

emphatic  as  antecedent       .     227 

-Ition,  -ation,  suffix  omitted  .     .     451 

Its,  post- Shakespearian    .     .     .     228 

substitutes  for    ...  228,  229 

-Ive,  suffix  passive    .    .     .     .     3,  445 


5o6 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


Juggler 

Just,  adj.  =  "exact  ". 
Just\cers 


PAR. 

477 

14 

443 


Know.    "  I  kno w  you  what  you 

are" 4*4 


L. 


Lack  =  "  to  be  wanting  "     .     .  293 

Laid  (adjective) 22 

Lated  (verb)    ....          .     .  290 

Latinisms 418 

Learn  (verb  act. ) 291 

Lengthening   of  words  in   pro- 
nunciation     ....    477-86 

Less,  suffix 3,  445 

Let  =  "did" 303 

Like.    "If  you  AX*  of  me*.    .  177 

Likes.     "It  likes  me"      .     .     .  297 
Lines,  see  Verses. 

Liquids  introduce  a  semi-vowel .  477 

List.     "List  a  brief  tale"     .     .  199 

'Longs  for  "  belongs ".     .     .     .  460 

Look.     "  To  look  your  dead  "   .  200 

Lover'd 294 

-Ly,  suffix 447 


M. 

Mad  (verb) 290 

Maj(«)ty,  (dissyllable)      ...  468 

Malice  (verb) 290 

Many.     "  Many  a  man " .     .     .  81 

"  A  many  men  "    ....  87 

a  noun 87 

an  adjective  adverbially  used  81 
Mark.     "Mark  King   Richard 

how  he  looks"    ....  414 

Marie  for  " marvel"     ....  461 
May,/ .;    •    •„•    \<  •    •    •  3,77-313 

May  not  =  must  not  310 
used  for  the  subjunctive  in 

the  sense  of  purpose  .  .  i38(_/) 

Me  for  "  I" 210 

=  "for  me"  "by  me"  .  .  220 

=  "myself" 223 

"Of  me"  for  "my"  .  .  .  225 

"Me  rather  had"  .  ...  230 


Mean.       "  What   mean    ye    to 

weep?". 356 

Meered  (particip.) 294 

Meiny  =  "  train  " 87 

derivation  of 12 

-Ment,  suffix 448 

Mete,  adj.  =  "complete"     .     .  15 

Mered  (particip.) 294 

Might 3°7~I3 

=  "could" 312 

Million'd  (participle  passive)      .  294 

Mine,  how  differs  from  "my  "  .  237 

used  for  "my" 238 

Misbecomed  for  "  misbecame  "  .  344 

Mistook  (participle)      ....  343 

Monosyllables  accented    .     .     .  457 

unaccented 456 

prolonged  so  as  to  make  up 

a  foot 479^-486 

Monosyllabic  prepositions,    ac- 
cent of 457< 

Moods 346-70 

Moral*?*- 443 

More,      most      =      "greater" 

"greatest" 17 

"More  better"      ....  n 

"More  fearful"     ....  51 

"  No  »W7V?  but  "    ....  127 

Most  =  "  greatest "      ....  17 

"Most  best" ii 

Mouthed  (participle  passive)      .  294 

Much  =  "  great" 51 

Must,  original  use  of    .     .     .     .  314 

=  "is  to  " 314 

My,  how  differs  from  "  mine  "  .  237 

"  Good  my  lord      ....  13 

Myself  (derivation  of)  .     ...  20 


N. 

Names,  used  as  adjectives  .     22,  430 
polysyllabic,  receive  but  one 

accent 469 

Near  for  "nearer" 478 

Necessited 295 

Neck.     "  In  the  neck  of  that "  .     160 

Need  (verb  intr.)      .     .     '     .     .     293 

"  What  «,?<?rf  ?  "      ....     297 

Needs  (adverb) 25 

Negative,  double 406 

Neither,  ellipse  of,  before  "nor"     396 

a  monosyllable 466 

used  for  "  both  "     ....     408 

-Ness,  suffix 449 

Never.  "  Never so"  .  .  .  52,  406 
No.  "  No  more  but" .  .  .  .  127 
Nominative  absolute  .  .  .  376-381 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


507 


PAR. 

Nominative,  ellipsis  of     .     .  399-402 
implied      from      participial 

phrases 413 

None.     "  I  will  none  of  it"  .     .  53 

Nor,  used  for  "  and"  ....  408 

Not  =  "  not  only  "       ....  54 

"  I  not  doubt" 305 

Nothing  (adv.) 55 

(perhaps) 490 

Noun  absolute 417 

noun-compounds    ....  430 
of  French  origin  formed  from 

verbs  without  change  .     .  451 

Nour(/)sh 463 


O. 


Object,  redundant 414 

Objective  following  intransitive 

verbs 198-201 

Ob'scure 492 

Of 165-79 

accented  in  "  out  of"     .     .  457** 

=  about  ....          .     .  174 

=  as  a  consequence  of  .     .  168 

=  as  regards 173 

"Blowing  of  his  nails"  .     .  178 

=  by 170 

—  from 166 

=  on 175 

original  meaning  "from"    .  169 

"1o  admit  of" 179 

with  verbs  of  filling    ...  171 

Off .    .    .  56 

connected  with  "  of     .     .  165 

On 180-2 

=  about 181 

"I  fall  on  weeping"  .     .     .  180 

"  One  on 's  ears  "  ....  182 

"  On  sleep" 140 

Once  =  "above  all;"    "once 

for  all" 57 

"  At  once  "  =  "once  for  all"  57 

One,  ellipse  of,  before  "  other"  .  396 

=  "  above  all  "      ....  18 

how  pronounced    ....  80 

(adjective)     .     .     .     130,  58,  420 

Only  transposed 420 

=  "  mere" 58 

Ope  for  "  open  "  (adj.)      .       343,  290 

Or,      or  .  . .  or  " 136 

=  "  before,"   "or  ere,"  "or 

ever" 131 

Other  for  "  others  " 12 

monosyllable 466 

(singular  pronoun)       ...  12 

Ought.      ' '  You  ought  not  walk  "  349 


PAR. 

Our,  antecedent  of  relative    .     .  218 
"  Come,  our  queen  "  .     .    13,  222 

=  "of  us" 219 

Ourselves,  derivation  of   ...  20 

Out  (preposition) 183 

Over  =  "  over  again  "...  s8a 

Overwatched  =  fatigued .     .     .  295 

Owe  for  "  own  " 290 

Owing  (adjective) 372 


P. 


Pale  (noun) 5 

Paled  (passive) 294 

Parted.    "Parted    with"     for 

"parted  from "  .     .     .     .  194 

Participles 372-381 

-ed  omitted  after  d  and  /      .  342 

-<•«  dropped 343 

irregular  formations  of   .     .  344 

prefix  y- 345 

imply  a  condition  ....  377 
used      absolutely     without 

Noun  or  Pronoun    .     .     .  378 
Passive  with  some  verbs  of  mo- 
tion    295 

Past  for  Present  tense      .     .     .  347 

Path  (verb) 290 

Pause,  effect  of  an  accent      .     .  453 
the  pause-extra-syllable    454,  455 
two  pause-extra-syllables     .  458 
frequently  prolongs  a  mono- 
syllable       481-486 

in  verses  of  four  accents    506-509 

Peer  ="  cause  to  peer  "  .     .     .  291 

Peers  (verb  transitive)  ....  291 

Pensived  (passive) 294 

Perchance.  "  Perc/tattce  I  will"  319 

Perfect  infinitive 360 

Perish  =  "  destroy  "     ....  291 

Perish<?«  =  they  perish     .     .     .  332 

Pers'ever 492 

Pined  (passive) 294 

Pitied.     "It  would  have  pitied 

a  man"      ....     I     .  297 

Plain  =  "  make  plain "    .     .     .  290 

Pleaseth.     "  Pleasethit"      .     .  361 

Pleasure,  has  two  accents      .     .  479 

Possess  =  "  inform  "   ....  295 

Practised  =  "  plotted  against "  294 

Prefixes      436-442 

dropped 460 

!!?""»;    •<.  ••„••••  44° 

in-     for     un-    \ 

"  un- "  for  "  in- "  J      *     '     '  ^2 

I    Prepositional  compounds  .     .     .  431 

Prepositions 138-204 


doubled 


5o8 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


Prepositions  omitted  before  in- 
direct object       ....     201 
omitted  after  verbs  of  motion, 
worth,  hearing,  and  other 

verbs 198-200 

omitted  in  adverbial  phrases     202 
transposed     ....      203,  424 

accent  of 457* 

local  and  metaphorical  mean- 
ing     138 

restricted  in  meaning       .     .     139 
transition   of  into    conjunc- 
tions        287,  151 

Present,  Simple  for  Complete  .  346 
Presently  =  "  at  once  "...  59 
Private  (noun)*  ...  .  .  5 
Probable  (adj.),  active  ...  3 
Pronoun,  personal  ....  205-243 
redundant  ....  242,  243 

relative 244~274 

omitted 244 

anomalies  of 205 

between  conjunction  and  in- 
finitive   216 

transposed 240 

Proper  =  "  own  " 16 

Prose,  when  used 515^ 

Prosody 452-5 1 5 

Prowess,  (quasi-monosyllable)   .     470 


Q. 

Quail  =•  "  make  to  quail "    .     .     291 
Quit  (participle) 342 


R  softens  or  destroys  a  following 

or  preceding  vowel        463,  464 

prolongs  -er 478 

when  following  a  vowel  pro- 
longs a  monosyllable   .     .     485 
-r  and  -re  final  dissyllabize 

monosyllables     ....     480 
after  dentals  introduces    a 

quasi-vowel 477 

Recall.   "  Unrecalling"  for  "un- 

recalled" 372 

Relatival  constructions      .     .   275-289 

Relative 244-274 

with  plural  antecedent  and 

singular  verb       ....     247 
omitted 244 

with  supplementary  pronoun  <2^ 
6>?"who,""  which,""that." 


Relish  (verb  transitive)     .     .     .  291 

Remains  for  "  it  remains"    .     .  404 

Remember  =  "  remind  "  .     .     .  291 

Rememb(<?)rance 477 

Retire  (verb  act.)      ....  291,  296 

Rhyme,  when  used 515 

Right  used  for  "  true  "...  19 

Rode  for  "  ridden  "       ....  343 

Round  =  "straightforwardly  "  60 

Royal,  why  transposed      .     .     .  419 

Run.     "Is  run" 295 


'S,  adverbial  suffix 25 

-S  final  dropped  after  se,  ce  .     .  471 

S  misprinted  in  Folio    ....  338 
Sanctuary  pronounced  "sanct'ry  "468 

Sat.     "  Being  sat" 295 

Save.     "Save  he" 118 

Sawn  for  "  seen  " 344 

Say  used  for  "  call "     .     .     .     .  200 

'Say'd  for  "  assayed  "  ....  460 

Scaling  =  "  weighing  "...  290 

'Se  for  "  shall  " 461 

Se'cure 492 

Seldom  (adjective) 22 

Self  (adjective) 20 

omitted 223 

Semb(^)lance 477 

Sense  for  "senses" 471 

Several  (noun) 5 

Severally  =  "  separately  "    .     .  61 

Shaked  for  "  shaken ".     .     .     .  343 

Shall 315-318 

"  1  shall,  my  lord  "...  315 

=  "  is  sure  to  "     ....  315 

"It  shall  come  to  pass"      .  317 
"Mark    you    his    absolute 

shall" 316 

She  for  ''her" 211 

"woman" 224 

Shine  (verb  act.) 291 

(verb  transitive)     ....  291 

Should 322-8 

denotes  contingent  futurity  322 
=  "  ought,"  "  was  to  "     323,  324 

should  have  "      ....  327 

like  German  "  sollen  "     .     .  328 
after  past,    corresponds   to 

"  shall  "  after  present  .     .  326 

Show  =  "  appear ".     ....  293 

Sightless  (passive)    ....  3 

Since,  difference  of  tenses  with  .  <  r 

^ 

A  year  since        ....  62 

"  Since  that  " 287 

=  "when" 132 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


509 


Sir,  a  mark  of  anger     ....  232 

Sith 132 

Smit  for  "  smitten  "      ....  343 

Smote  for  "smitten"  ....  343 

So  inserted 63 

omitted 64 

for  "also" 65 

for  "then" 66 

"^longtime"     ....       67 
=  "  provided  that "    .     .     .  133 
11  So  that,"  "so as "="  pro- 
vided that" 133 

"  So  defend  thee  heaven  "  .  133 

"  So  (as) "  omitted      .     .     .  281 

".To  as" 109,  275 

"  So  that : "  that  omitted    .  282 

,,  so  omitted    .     .  283 

"So  .  .  .  where"  ....  279 

Solicit  (noun) 451 

Some 21 

Something,  adv 68 

Sometimes  =  "  formerly "     .     .       6&ei 

Sorrow.     "  I  am  sorrow"     .     .  230 

Spake  for  "  spoken  "     ....  344 

Speak.     "Speak  him  fair"  .     .  200 

Splitted 344 

Spoke  (participle) 343 

Squint  (verb  act.) 291 

Stand.     "  It  stands  me  upon  "  .  204 
"  Stand  on  tip-toe  "  ...       24 

Stept.     "  Being  deep  slept"     .  295 
Still  for  "constantly"  .     ...       69 

Streaming  =  "  unfurling"    .     .  290 

Strove  for  ' '  striven  "     .  343 

Strucken 344 

Studied.    "  As  one  that  had  been 

studied" 295 

Subjunctive 361-70 

in  a  dependent  sentence      .  368 

of  purpose 311 

used   indefinitely  after   the 

relative 367 

used  optatively  or  impera- 
tively      364 

with  "an"  or  "and"      .     .  102 
Such.      "Such  as"    =    "Such 

that " 109 

"  Such  that " 279 

"Such  where"       ....  279 

"  Such  which "      ....  278 

Suffixes 443-50 

"-atinn,"    " -ition,"  omitted  451 
"-^"(active).     .     .     .     3,445 

"-en" 444 

"-JTV"  (passive)     .     .     .      3,445 

"-less" 446 

"-fy" 447 

"  -went" 448 

"-*'•"" 449 


PAR. 

Suffix,  "-y" 450 

Suffocate  (participle)    ....  342 

for  "  suffocated  "   ....  342 

Superlative  in  -est  for  "  very  "  .  8 

after  dentals  and  liquids      .  9 

confusion  in 409 

double ii 

inflection,  ellipse  of   ...  398 

Swam  for  "  swum "      ....  344 

Sweaten 344 

Sword^r 443 

Syllables  dropped  in  writing    460,  461 
dropped  or  slurred  in  pro- 
nunciation     ....  467-473 


T. 


Taint  (participle) 342 

Tear  (dissyllable) 480 

Tenses,  irregularities  of 

34,6,  348,  ?6o,  370,  371 
Terrible  =  "  frightened         .     .  3 
Than,    with     comparative,    ex- 
plained    70 

for  "then" 70 

Thankful  ="  thank-worthy  "    .  3 

That,  demonstrative,  " that  zs"  \2T' 
(200 

"  that  which  " 267 

difference  between    "  that," 
"  who,"  and  "  which  "   258-259 

relative 260-262 

less  definite  than  "  which"  .  268 

"  whatsoever  that "    .     .     .  286 

a  conjunctional  affix  .     .     .  287 

=  "because,"  "when"      .  284 
in    "after   that"    &c.    like 

"quam"  in  "postquam"  288 

omitted  and  then  inserted  .  285 

omitted  after  "so"     .     .     .  282 

"  So  that:"  "  so"  omitted  .  283 

"Such  that" 279 

=  that  which 244 

before  a  verbal       ....  93 

"  The  better " 94 

omitted 89,  90 

' '  Tin-  which  " 287 

The  omitted  in  archaic  poetry   .  82 

"the  .  .  .  that"      ....  267 

apparently  accented   .     .     .  457 

"  Lifts  the  head  "  ....  228 

"  The  Talbot  ;  "  "/'//fdeath"  92 

Thee,  dative 220 

for"thou" 212 

Their  the  genitive  of  "they"     .  219 

Them  for     they " 214 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


PAK. 

Then  for  "  than  " 70 

for  (?)  "  when  " 71 

There,  for  "  thereupon,"  "  then"  70 

"  There  is,"  ellipse  of     .     .  403 

They.    "  They  in  France"    .     .  245 

Thinks  (verb  impersonal) .     .     .  297 

"  Where  it  thinkst  best"    .  212 

"  ^Atthoughts"  "met/link"  297 

"  I  think  it  be "     .     .     .     .  299 

This  for  "this  is" 461 

Thorough  for  "  through "       .     .  478 

Thou 231,235 

omitted 241 

between  equals 231 

to  servants 232 

as  an  insult 233 

rhetorical      ......  234 

apparent  exceptions   .     .     .  235 

Though.     "  Though  that"    .     .  287 
Thought.      "  Thought  to  have 

begged" 360 

Thyself,  derivation  of  ....  20 

Till  =  to 184 

To 185-90 

used  after  "  see,"  "  feel  "    .  349 

=  according  to 187 

"  To  be  abridged  "=  "  about 

being  abridged ".     ...  357 
"  To  be"  for  "being"    .     .  357 
"  To  give  you"  =  "by  giv- 
ing you"   357 

"  I  would  to  God"     ...  190 

=  "  in  addition  to  "  .     .     .  185 

=  "  in  comparison  with  "    .  187 

inserted  for  connection    .     .  416 

inserted,  omitted  ....  349 

=  "like" 187 

prefix 437 

=  "  with  a  view  to"  .     .     .  186 

"With  God  to  friend"    .     .  189 

"  To-fore  " 72 

Toil  (verb  act.) 290 

Toil'd  (passive) 294 

Tongue  (verb) 290 

"  T^-night  " 190 

Too  =  "very" 73 

"  Too  blame  " 73 

Took  (participle) 343 

Towards,  sometimes     ....  492 

Traded  (passive) 294 

Transpositions 422-27 

of  adjectives  and  participles  419 

of  indefinite  article     .     .     .  422 

of  adverbs 420 

of  possessive  adjectives  .     .  13 

of  prepositions 424 

Trifle  (verb  transitive)       .     .     .  136 
Trimeter  Couplets   ....  500-503 


U. 


PAR. 

Un- for  "  in-,"  prefix     ....  442 
Unaccented   syllable   of    a   tri- 
syllable softened      .     .     .  468 

Under  (adjective) 22 

Undoubted  =  "  undaunted  "     .  148 

Unfair  (verb) 290 

Unsisting  for  "  unresisting"  .     .  460 

Until  with  subjunctive       .     .     .  302 

for  "  unto  " 184 

Upon 191,  192 

"  It  stands  me  upon  "     .     .  204 

Us  for  "we" 215 

Utensils 492 


V. 


Verbal  preceded  by  "  the  "  and 

not  followed  by  "  of"      .       93 
preceded  by  "  in  "      ...     164 
followed   by   "of"  and  not 
preceded  by  "  the "      .     .     178 

Verb-compounds 432 

Verbs,  auxiliary 298,  331 

intransitive  used  transitively     291 

impersonal 297 

inflection  of  third  for  second 

person .     340 

intransitive  followed  by  the 

objective 198-200 

of  filling  with  "of"    .     .     .      171 
passive,  formation  of .     .     .     294 
singular  inflection  with  plu- 
ral subject      ....      333-9 

reflexive 296 

formed  from  nouns  and  ad- 
jectives        290 

transitive  used  intransitively  293 
passive  to  express  motion  .  295 
Indicative  mood  .  .  .  346-348 

Infinitive 349-360 

Subjunctive 361-369 

Participles     ....       372,  381 
Tenses      .   346-348,  370,  361,  132 
Verses  of  five  accents   .     .     .  452,  453^ 

of  six  accents  apparently  {j^lj^ 
of  four  accents  apparently  504-510 
of  three  and  two  accents  511,512 
the  Amphibious  verse  .  .  513 
in  four  accents  spoken  by 

fairies,  witches,  &c.     .     .     504 
Versing  (writing  in  verse)      .     .     290 

Very  =  true 16 

Vouchsafed 294 


VERBAL  INDEX. 


PAR. 

PAR. 

polysyllable,  slurred    .     .     468 
affected  by  r  .    463,  464,  478,  480 

more  definite  than  "  which  "    266 
Why.     "Jr/ythat"    ....     287 
"  For  why  ?  "    75 

W. 

Waft  (participle)  342 
Waged  =  "paid"  290 
Wanteth  (impersonal  verb)    .     .     297 
\Varr  «r)nt  463 
Were,  subjunctive  use  of.     .  301,  302 
What,  exclamation  of  impatience      73** 

"  Why  and  for  what  "     .     .       75 
"  Why  and  wherefore  ''  .     .       75 
Wilful  blame  432 
Will,  ellipses  after  405 
substituted  for  "shall"  .     .     316 
"That...  he  will"    ...     311 
"I  w/tfnot"  =  "I  shall" 
in  Shakespeare  ....     319 
difficult  passages    .     .     .     .     321 
Wish.     "The  rest  I  wish  thee 

how  checked  252 

Witch  (verb)  290 

=  "  whatever,"  "who"      .     254 

accents  504 

^  .      followed  by  antecedent  .     .     252 

=        Me  ;"       195 

Whatsoever,  "  whutsoevertiaA."    286 
Whe'er  for  "  whether"     .     .     .466 
When.     "  When  that"     .     .     .     287 

"  I  live  with  (on)  bread"    .     194 
Withal     .........     196 
Without  =  "  unlike  "  "  outside 

Where.     "  So.  ..where"   .     .     .     279 
"  Such...7i'/t?rc"    ....     279 
=  "  whereas  "  134 
Whereas  =  "  where"  .     .     .     .     135 
Whether.     "  Or  whether"    .     .     136 
Which,  anomalies  of    ....     273 
"  Such  tnhich  "       ....     278 
"  which  that  "         ....     250 
difference  between  "which," 

Woe.  "Iam7tw"  230 
Wont,  derivation  of      ....         5 
Would  =  "was  wont  to"      .     .     330 
not  used  for  "should"   .     .     331 
for  "wish,  require"    .     .     .     329 
"  I  would  to  God  "...     190 
in  the  consequent  clause     .     322 
Wreathen  (participle)  ....     344 
Wrestfc)ler      477 

interchanged  with   "who" 
and  "that"   265 
less  definite  than  "who"    .     266 
mure  ileimite   than   "that"     268 
with  repeated  antecedent    .     269 
"  The  which  "  270 

Wrote  for  "  written  "    .     .     .     .     343 

Y. 

Y-,  (participial  prefix'   ....    344 

thetical      271 

-Y,  suffix    450 

=  "as  to  which"       .     .     .     272 
While    whiles      137 

Ye,  differs  from  "  you  "...     236 

"/F///Y<-  that"    .          -                287 

"a-while,"  "whilom"    .     .     137 

Yet  =  "as  yet"  before  a  nega- 

with  subjunctive     ....     302 
Whilst.  "  The  whilst"  ....       74 
Whist  for  "  whisted  "                         342 

You,  differs  from  "  thou  "     .  231-235 
a  mark  of  anger  to  servants, 

Who,  transition  from  relative  to 
interrogative  251 
"  As  who  should  say  "    .     .     257 
difference  between   "  who," 
"  which,"  and  "  that  "     .     258 
=  "  and  he,"  "  for  he  "  .     .     263 
personifies    irrational   ante- 
cedents           264 

differs  from  "  ye  "      .     .     .     236 
Youngly  (adverb)     23 
Your,  antecedent  of  relative      .     218 
=•  "of  you"      219 
colloquial  use  of    ....     220 
dissyllable    480 
Yours.     "This  of  yours".     .     ,     239 
Yourselves,  derivation  of  ...       20 

111057 


LONDON : 

K.    CLAY,    SONS,    AND    TAYLOR,    PRINTERS, 
BREAD   STREET   HILL. 


PR  3075  .A2  SMC 

Abbott,  E.A. 

A  Shakespearian  grammar 


